It’s been a lot of fun and a lot of work. It’s pretty amazing, because I never guessed it would’ve turned into what it’s turned into when we started out. I was just hoping there was a big enough group of people out there that still wanted a space game like the kind I made so I could go off and make it. Obviously we’re way beyond that. We’ve been able to build this really large company that’s dedicated to making the best space game possible. We now have over 360 people in four studios spread between L.A., Austin, Manchester and Frankfurt. We also have folks working on it up in Montreal. It’s pretty amazing that from this one idea, this big company has grown and evolved, and of course that comes with its own set of work. There’s a challenge to build and grow a company while trying to build a really ambitious game.
And it’s really interesting that we’re doing it in public. All the past games I’ve built have been built behind closed doors, and have been funded by a publisher. You’d go off and work on something for several years before you even show it to people. With Star Citizen, from the very beginning, we were just like, “Hey! This is what we’re doing!” That is exhilarating, and it’s great to get feedback and all that stuff, but of course that can have unfavorable consequences. But I’d rather take the good with the bad.
The biggest takeaway for me is the community. In the past, all the games I’ve made — I knew that people liked them, they got all these reviews — but you never really connected to the people that liked the game or what you were doing. That’s not what happens with a crowdfunded game. We have this huge, supportive community, and over the last four years they’ve supported us to a level no other crowdfunding game has seen before. They make this game possible. It’s amazing to see their excitement and enthusiasm.

You have this direct connection to the players, and there’s something really cool about that — not just for me, but for a lot of the people working on this stuff. When they build a cool ship or they build a cool feature, all these people say, “Ahh, I really like that, it’s really cool!” A lot of times when you’re creating something, you’re doing it for yourself, but you also want to do it so other people enjoy it. If you’re working on a triple-A game, you could be locked up for four years before knowing whether anyone likes it or not or is even excited about it. In our case, we know there’s a big community out there that’s super excited and can’t get enough of it.
Star Citizen is pretty much the game I’ve been wanting to build for all my life. If you look at the history of games I’ve built, you sort of see bits of it along the way. When I was a kid, I’d watch things like Star Wars and Star Trek and Battlestar Galactica. I read a lot of science fiction. I imagined living in this future world, but the technology never felt like it was there. Wing Commander was specifically done the way it was done to work with the technology at that time to be immersive in that world and story, but we were on a pretty constrained path relative to what we’re doing in Star Citizen.
You can do whatever profession you want to do. You can go to all these various locations, wander around worlds, fly ships, and have it all done in this detail that you would imagine you could project yourself in as a person. It’s not abstract. It’s not looking at the exterior of a 3D ship. It’s actually walking around inside the ship; it’s sitting in the captain’s chair, flying in and landing and getting up and walking around on the planet you’ve landed on. I’ve always wanted to do that.
We’re planning to get about 100 star systems in the game. Each star system will have anywhere from one to six planets, and then there will obviously be moons, space stations, asteroid fields and all the rest of the stuff. You’ll have oceans and forests and mountains, different homesteads and locations, as well as the landing areas. There’s going to be a huge increase in the play area and what people can do, and we’re really going for a kind of frequency of interaction and interest and AI and everything that is much more dense than what you’d typically get in a space game.
Normally you’d go to a star system and maybe there would be one or two locations you could land on, you buy or sell stuff, and then you’d go to another location. With Star Citizen just one star system should have enough content and enough things to do for players to play for hundreds, even thousands of hours. The density of experience is going to be much higher than what you’ve seen in other space games, including my own.
We actually have a full universe simulation that runs on separate servers, responsible for deciding which planets are trading, which organization is doing what, which factories are doing well, who’s selling what, who needs what kind of goods. It’s populating the universe with the various people going about their jobs, whether it’s a pirate, trader, bounty hunter, law enforcer — they’re all running around in this universe simulation, and then we use that simulation to drive the content that people interact with when they’re flying around in the universe.

The whole concept is to have a living, breathing universe that reacts and responds to the players’ actions. We’re doing things like items, ships or even characters that age, wear and tear. You need to make sure that you’re servicing your spaceship or your equipment, otherwise it’s gets damaged. The idea is that nothing in this world should feel static. It should feel like your actions, and your friends’ actions, have an impact. And the world moves on whether you’re participating or not. I think that makes the game quite different from a lot of the MMOs out there. We obviously haven’t got all this working; it’s all in different stages of development, but that’s the long-term vision — a dynamic, living, breathing universe where you can just go off and spend as long as you want in it.
I’m building the game that I wanted to build. There’s been a vast amount of long hours and assets just to get it here, and there’s still going to be a lot more long hours and assets to get it online. But I’m building it because it’s something that I want to play. I have no doubt in every fiber of my being that we will deliver the game that I see in my head and the game that I think will be really great, and I think my team is like-minded. In any endeavor, there’s always people who say, “It’s too ambitious. You won’t make it.” But there’s a Chinese proverb: Those who think it can’t be done should get out of the way of those who are doing it. I very much ascribe to that.
If you take a look and see what we’ve shared over the years and the progress we’ve made, there’s a lot of things people said we couldn’t do that we are doing right now. We are doing some things on a scale and scope and complexity that no other game has achieved. Yes, we aren’t finished yet, and we have a lot more stuff to do. But for me, that’s more just a matter of time. Are we always going to be on time, are we always going to make dates? No. In all software development I’ve been a part of, it never happens that way. Our attitude is that we’re going for quality.

The only worry that I have is losing the support of the community. That’s what’s enabling us to make the game that we’re making right now. As long as we have the support of the community, I have no doubt that we will make this amazing game. Now whether that’s the amazing game that everyone out there wants, I can’t say. Everyone has their own particular vision of what they think is the thing they need. But I will say I have a pretty good feeling that what we will deliver will satisfy and impress a good amount of people. I really believe it. We’re basically combining a lot of the things you’ve never had in one game before. It’s going to take us longer to get to that nirvana of it all, but I think it will be something very special.

People can complain about dates and timelines, but what they really want is a great experience. We’re not doing just a single player game. We have this open-world universe, that you can venture around in for years to come. You don’t want to cut corners — you want to build it right. Something that’ll last for a long time — that’s my goal. I’m not looking at this game like I’m going to finish it and then move on to the next game. This is it. This is going to be a living product, a living world. It will evolve with content, features, graphical capabilities. It will be a constantly living product getting bigger, better and richer over the years. When you do that, you need to make sure the foundation is right.
Have to wait a little longer. It’s going really well, not showing it at Gamescom because Chris wants it at a certain level of polish. Lots of things they show in AtV, and some from 3.0, is specifically being used for SQ42. Some things like the Planet tech has also gone into SQ42 too. There are cases where you go down on moons or planets. Lots of high quality performance and motion capture data, making sure that when characters are moving they look great and fluid going from AI pathing to merging scenes with characters. Trying to make you feel like you’re part of the story and not just hanging with AI. It will be worth the wait.
Planetary tech. This will be the first time the community can go and land, in the case of 3.0, moons or an asteroid planetoid. Fully realized, can circumnavigate the whole thing if you wanted to. The amount of additional playable area that comes into the game now is huge, the game will open up a lot because of that planetary tech. It’s really exciting, there’ s a lot of gameplay that will come out of it, and it’s one of the reasons things are taking longer than they’d like. Once they’ve opened up the potential of the planets though, they need to make sure there’s stuff to do. They’re not just creating the planets, but also systems, eco systems, flora, fauna, things to make it alive, things to do, things to procedurally create outposts or towns or villages beyond just the landing zones. The original version of SC was aiming to be more like Freelancer; couldn’t explore the landing zones. You’d go from in orbit to transition to a few locations in a town. Now they have whole worlds opened up. Amount of potential for exploration long-term, and for players to do things, create their own base or settlement, lots of gameplay potential. Just seeing the beginnings of it in 3.0.
Trying very much to get the quality of the animation and the AI movement to be equivalent to what you see in prerendered cinematics. They spent time shooting with actors, 100 days of performance capture. Most big movies won’t shoot for more than 100 days. For the amount that CIG have, there’s a vast amount of performance data and animation and story, really want to make sure it comes across so when you’re playing and moving around and talking to Old Man or the various other characters that you’re playing the game alongside, because you’re basically in a movie as opposed to Wing Commander 3 and 4, you were the stuntman flying the ship, then you’d see what Mark Hamill does, in this case it’s you, you just happen to be the lead star in the movie. Getting that to the fluidity they want, cause it’s a huge story, it taking longer than anticipated.
They’re still working on final assets, but all the missions and chapters are blocked out. Each chapter would be several missions in say Wing Commander. They’re somewhere between white and grey boxes. They’re taking certain levels to finished. One section of the story they were talking about last year they’re still doing. They’ll be showing something at some point, but not this gamescom, and Chris would hate to make promises cause last year he said they wanted to, but it didn’t get to the point they were happy with and everyone was upset, and Chris felt back because they still showed some fantastic stuff, which in Chris’ mind was great stuff, but the hype of that was affected by them not showing SQ42. Animations and AI, going for a level of AI you don’t normally have, so when you’re on a ship you’re serving on, the Stanton which is an Idris, all the crew have a schedule. They get up in the morning, go eat breakfast, go to their job, eat after dinner, etc… and sleep, there’s a whole schedule and cycle. Almost a level of sims simulation for AI. They’ll also use that for the PU. Dialing that in while getting subsumption working; in 3.0 all missions run off subsumption, and in SQ everything uses subsumption now too, whereas before it used an older cryengine system. Getting everything dialed in to look as good or better than everything else.
Kind of hard to say. They build the game to support everything, from joystick to gamepad to KBM. All have pros and cons. For running around on foot FPS, KBM is probably best, for flying Joystick probably is. Mouse flight might be too easy or give an edge, but when they show stuff off, and Chris doesn’t want to spoil Friday, but it’s better to have a joystick. For Chris, he hasn’t set it up yet, but a nice wide monitor, 4k across, switch between HOTAS and MKB.
In the case of Star Citizen, the concept of finishing a game is probably pretty loose. The time they stop adding stuff is probably when it dies as an online game. They’ll always add features and content to keep it alive. The moment they stop adding functionality, that’s when the game’s dead. EVE 10 years later, WoW, etc…
Why version 1.0? At this moment if you back SC, you can download 2.6.3, 3.0 very soon, you’ll be able to go from moons. In 3.1 when Hurston and Stanton are in, you’re getting the game as it happens. It’s not like we’re not giving it to you till a certain point, traditionally a publisher’ll work on a game, they’ll tell you about it, but you won’t get to play it till right before it comes out. You’re not playing what EA’s developing two or three years before they’re building it. With SC, the idea of a finish line in a SC sense doesn’t make sense. They have a fairly set set of general features, but as new things come online like the planetary tech, they need to do new things to make things interesting, so they add new things to make it good, and ultimately Chris wants to make the most interesting experience he can. He wants to get it to the point where he feels like he’s adding additional stuff vs. getting the basic functionality in.
When I said I missed old school difficulty to gaming you probably didn’t think that I would make the pledge process more difficult than fighting the toughest boss monster in Demon’s Souls!

Well neither did I!

Wednesday morning we set out to prove that PC gaming and Space Sims are not dead… and prove it, we did!

We’re absolutely floored by the attention and humbled by your comments. We hoped everyone would be excited about the big idea behind Star Citizen and Squadron 42 — but we had no expectation about the kind of praise and interest we received yesterday.

The downside of all this attention was that the huge number of people from all around the world trying to learn about Star Citizen and make their pledge, crashed our custom crowd funding page and also took down the core community site.

Until then, we were on track to break crowd funding records. Now, thirty hours later, we’re only just getting the core site back online. The proper crowd funding page is still unfortunately down, but we have a backup site that, while not having the full range of features we intended, can take people’s pledges. With this site we have to update the data manually as there is no way to easily collect the crowd funding statistics on a live basis, which is why you haven’t seen a counter on the backup site. We are working very hard to get the main crowd funding plug in to play nice with the rest of the site, so we can deliver the seamless experience we envisioned when opting to have the crowd funding integrated into the main community site. Don’t worry, no one has lost their golden ticket, and we will ensure that everyone who makes a pledge on the backup site is connected to their community account. Please be patient while we organize this process.

We didn’t just set out to raise money to build a game; we set out to build a community. The intention was never to shut off the forums, disable the Golden Tickets or stop the flow of information after the launch; anything but. We hope you’ll bear with us as we get the community back online. The features you’ve enjoyed for the past month will continue — the Comm-Link, RSI Museum and Time Capsule — along with much more information about Star Citizen and chances to interact with its development team. As we move forward in this endeavor, you are our strongest asset; a vanguard of dedicated fans who will help us build and promote this game.

If you’re one of the lucky few warriors that snuck past the Java trolls and WordPress goblins to access the pledge site yesterday, thank you so much for your dedication.

If not, we promise we’ve beaten back these evil interlopers and ask you to pledge and spread the word to make this new universe possible. We are listening to you on the forums, are committed to giving you daily updates and will be rolling out some exciting new features in the coming days that hopefully make up for our initial snafu.

We lost the opportunity to break the first day record, but the race isn’t over yet! We currently stand at 55, 590 raised from 4,564 pledges which is pretty impressive considering the outage we’ve had. Seems everyone wants the RSI Constellation and physical goodies!
But we need get this up. Space Sims trumped RPGs in the old days, let’s get a little of that inter-genre friendly rivalry back!
If you haven’t made your pledge yet, please do as I would hate for the technical problems to have derailed our initial momentum. We still have a ways to go but I have no doubt with your support we will get there. This is our chance to tell the world: PC gaming and space sims are BACK!
2014 has been a huge year for Star Citizen.

THEN: the Hangar Module in 2013
THEN: the Hangar Module in 2013
NOW: Arena Commander 1.0 in action; screenshot by PiteCZek
NOW: Arena Commander 1.0 in action; screenshot by PiteCZek
NEXT: The FPS Mode's Battle Arena
NEXT: The FPS Mode's Battle Arena
We launched Arena Commander v0.8 in June and since then we’ve shown the ambition of the First Person Universe we are building with a prototype of multi crew ship combat, the scale and detail of the planet side environments and demonstrated the visceral action of the First Person Combat that players will experience in Star Citizen.

We’ve delivered 23 updates to Star Citizen / Arena Commander, four of them being major feature updates (v0.8. v0.9, v0.9.2) with the last one being the largest, Arena Commander v1.0, with fifteen new ships for backers to fly (all the Aurora and Hornet variants, Mustang family, Base Avenger and Cutlass Black) as well as significant gameplay additions like the signature system and social features like the first version of the lobby system allowing you to join up with your friends.

Star Citizen’s backers downloaded 13.7 PETABYTES of data from Star Citizen’s CDN during 2014 up from just ONE Petabyte in 2013. The community logged over two million sessions and one million hours playing Arena Commander which has been split approximately 80% single player and 20% multiplayer

Cloud Imperium’s staff – which is solely dedicated to making Star Citizen – has grown from 70 employees last Christmas to 180 today, spread around four internal locations; Santa Monica, Austin, Manchester, UK and a nascent office in Germany that we will be sharing details about in the coming year.

We have an additional 120 developers working on the game spread between our partners at Behaviour, Illfonic, Turbulent, outsource companies and individual contractors.

The number of Star Citizens doubled in 2014, which helped the project to raise $33M in additional funding, bringing the total raised since October 10th 2012 to just over $68.5M.

All of this allows us to build Star Citizen to a level of ambition that no publisher would dare to reach for on a PC… let alone a Space Sim!

When looking back at how far Star Citizen and its community has come in just two short years I am always amazed. What is the secret of the project’s support?

People that just read headlines wonder why; why have we raised so much money, why do people still contribute money to Star Citizen, why are people so excited?

Like many things Star Citizen isn’t easy to understand with a cursory glance. Star Citizen doesn’t easily fit in a familiar box like most games you’ll buy from a major publisher.

It’s something I’ve been reflecting on, especially as I have a couple of talks coming up with BAFTA in Los Angeles and at DICE in Las Vegas. What makes Star Citizen defy so many conventions? What continues to propel Star Citizen every month despite the game still being in development?

Numbers are always easy to focus and make nice headlines but they don’t tell the real story of why Star Citizen has gotten to where it is.

Star Citizen would be nothing without its real trump card –

The most engaged community in gaming!

It’s easy to say Star Citizen is a community focused game but it’s so much more than that. Very early in the project I made a decision to go beyond the traditional alpha model and share functionality of the game as we built it, updating and involving the community every step of the way. It is one thing to share updates but it’s a whole other level of engagement to share incremental builds with subsets of functionality of the final game to get hands on feedback.

We actively solicit and listen to feedback on the numerous patches (which we deliver on average twice a month). We have multiple video shows each week discussing the game, giving behind the scenes glimpses and highlighting community contributions. We give more detailed monthly updates to our backers on the game’s progress than I ever gave any publisher I was making a game for!

Anyone that first installed the Hangar module back in August 2013, then played Arena Commander v0.8 in June and has now has Arena Commander v1.0 on their drive can attest to the progress that has been made, how feedback from the community affects the updates and how things slowly but steadily get better and more polished.

Are we done? No! We have a long way to go! No one at CIG is resting on their laurels but it it’s this PARTNERSHIP with all of YOU, the community that is enabling a game of this ambition to be made. You are a community that contributes something much more valuable than funding for development. You contribute your time, your feedback, your ideas and your passion.

And THIS is the secret of Star Citizen.

It’s a project that is being built not just by 300 developers, but a project that is being built by hundreds of thousands of gamers that love PC games, that love space games and want to see a game made RIGHT, one that has such depth and ambition that they can see themselves happily adventuring for years to come.

This is a model I and the rest of the team at CIG have happily embraced. I have never had so much fun building a game and if you asked any Star Citizen developer they will probably agree with me. We love the process of creating this game lock step with all of you out there. We are continually amazed by the creativity and enthusiasm of the community. How within hours of a patch going up we can watch streams of people playing. The team is constantly passing around fan videos where we see something surprising; whether it’s a bit of skill, an exploit we didn’t see or just a piece that sums up Star Citizen better than we could. The original “Imagine” trailer by Kieran (years1hundred on YouTube) was a great example, but there’s other amazing stuff out there; DeVall’s “Hype Citizen” trailer, Corporation Incorporated / Fiendish Feather’s videos of Scavenging on a wrecked Constellation, a Search and Rescue mission or just showcasing the Mustang Variants is just a small sampling of what our community is capable of.

So when I read a press article that questions whether we can deliver all the promised features to keep everyone happy, or I see someone that can’t fathom how Star Citizen can have such support and without doing any research jump to cynical conclusions I just smile.

Because with the community we have and the passionate and talented team of developers I can’t imagine us “flopping” as a few bloggers have predicted. Not because we’re better than everyone else, but because building a game this way, in total lock step with your community, means it’s pretty hard to fail in the long run. Will we build everybody’s dream game? Of course not, that would be impossible! But with this level of engagement and iteration I think we’ll build something special that people can happily lose themselves in even if it doesn’t have every feature they dreamed of.

And it won’t stop there.

The number one priority for team in building the Persistent Universe is how players themselves can affect the universe. We’re building a game that will be just as community driven once the game is “finished”. It’s why we’ve built organization support into the web site, why we’re expanding it this coming year with private forums and blogs and starting to layer in the organization support in the game itself.

Star Citizen isn’t a sprint, it isn’t even a marathon. There is no final finish line the way you would have with a traditional retail game. Star Citizen is a way of life for as long as the community is engaged by it.

My 100% focus, and the rest of the team is to make sure all of you are continually engaged. Not just by the “finished” game (if you can ever call anything in Star Citizen finished) but by the development process, the early builds of the game, by the discussion and feedback loop.

And this is what I tell my friends in the industry that have no idea how we’ve managed to do what we do. You have to throw away the old approaches to how you develop, how you share and how you engage your community.

Or in Silas Koerner’s words, “Dare to challenge the expectation of what has come before. To embrace the unique. To put everything on the line. Only when you risk everything can we discover something truly special”

EVERYONE, both the development team and all of you are dedicated to making Star Citizen something special. If we don’t get a feature perfect the first time we will continue to refine and improve.

And that is what will make Star Citizen different than most other publisher backed games. We have the willpower and patience. Our stakeholders just have one goal in mind…

Make the Best Damn Space Sim Ever!

So here’s a big THANK YOU for everyone’s support, patience and enthusiasm in 2014 and here’s to looking forward to continuing to make history together in 2015.
After many months of estimating and planning I am excited to share with you the Star Citizen Schedule and Roadmap for the rest of this year.



First, I would like to take a moment to thank the outstanding producers around the company who have worked with the Directors and Leads to bring this schedule to the point we feel comfortable sharing it publicly. Creating a proper production schedule is a Herculean task in and of itself and then knowing that it will be visible to over a million eager supporters around the world is a daunting prospect. The schedule you are now looking at is built from the estimates of hundreds of developers around the company, collected and integrated against our overall objectives for the game. To give you an idea of the work that goes into building and maintaining a schedule of the complexity needed for Star Citizen, I would like to share a video with you, it’s well worth your time to see just how much work and thought is needed to schedule manage something of the scope of Star Citizen.

The next Release is a major milestone for us, as it will be the first time the community will get to experience the Planetary Tech in a Live build.


Like the Star Citizen Alpha numbering change from 1.3 to 2.0 for the move to Large World, with its 64-bit precision and Local Grid physics tech, that allows us to deliver a game of our detail at a solar system scale, 3.0 represents a giant jump in gameplay potential from the code in the 2.x branch. For a start, it will contain about nine months of our main development branch beyond 2.6.x as well as almost two years of Planetary Tech development that the Frankfurt Engine team embarked on in the last half of 2015. The Planetary Tech opens up a whole new landscape (pun intended) for adventure. In the same way that Large World and Physics Grids created new possibilities in gameplay by allowing players to go from walking around a space station to boarding a ship, flying it hundreds of thousands of kilometers, exiting their pilot seat, walking to an airlock, opening it and EVAing over to a derelict station, all from the same point of view, the Planetary Tech takes it one massive leap further. When you see a Planet or Moon, you will be able to fly there, land and explore on foot, or from your ship or a ground vehicle you have brought with you. All seamlessly, all with the incredible first person detail that Star Citizen is known for. With this we are delivering something that goes way beyond the initial promises and conception of Star Citizen; we will be simulating a First person Universe with almost no limits. It’s a great illustration of how with the support of a Community as great as Star Citizen’s anything is possible.



With the debut of 3.0 at the end of June we’re starting with the three Moons around Crusader; Cellin, Yela and Daymar. In addition, we’re hoping to also get the Planet-like Asteroid Delamar and its landing zone Levski in as a “Stretch” goal. Then as we move through the year the universe will expand to include all the main landing zones for Stanton. We had originally hoped to deliver most of the Stanton Landing Zones with the first release of Planetary Tech, but that proved optimistic once the talented team at Behaviour, who had built ArcCorp, Levski, Grim HEX and had begun work on the remaining landing zones of Stanton, moved off Star Citizen and onto another Behaviour project in December. We had been steadily shifting our reliance away from external resources and we felt it would be unfair to block them from the opportunity to work on their own game. Unfortunately, replacing an Environment team of over 20 is no small task, which has set back the progress we had originally planned to make on the landing zones of Stanton. As of today, we have just abut replaced the team with internal hires and we are continuing to hire additional environment artists as fast as we can find ones that meet our quality bar. The Environment Team is now some 37 artists strong, so long term we feel we are better situated to deliver the vast amount of locations that Star Citizen and Squadron 42 needs.

Rather than make everyone wait for the landing zones to all be completed we decided the best course of action would be to get the Planetary Tech and the other improvements in everyone’s hands as soon as possible. Our goal for 3.0 is to again do what we found so valuable when building Arena Commander: involve the community as soon as possible. More than any other process, it is YOUR feedback that helps further Star Citizen’s development… which means that we need you on our moons with this next release. The worlds we’re creating are massive, and giant planets mean we need a lot of eyes (and mice, keyboards and flight sticks) making sure they’re up to par. How big do I mean? It takes about four and half hours to circumnavigate the Cellin in a Dragonfly at full afterburn or twelve and half days of walking! If every single person registered through RSI today stood on the same moon at the same distance, they wouldn’t even see each other. There’s a lot to explore and a LOT to test in this massive step forward for Star Citizen.


While the Planetary Tech is maybe the biggest headline, it is just one of the many new pieces of tech that will debut with 3.0. With the increased detail of the Weekly Studio reports, you’ve been seeing glimpses of fundamental systems that we have been building that will dramatically increase the ability to interact and be immersed in the universe of Star Citizen. Systems like Item 2.0 with its new Player Interaction Mode that allows for a much wider variety of actions and gameplay, such as managing a wider array of your ship’s functions to using and manipulating items like you can in real-life. Or the Entity Owner Manager that will allow us to persist proper state on Players, Ships and Items no matter where they are, even if not in memory or owned by a Player. If your ship is shot up, it will still be shot up when you log back in or return to spot you left it on a Moon. Or the completely new dynamic Physics Grid System that handles the needs of planets and the wide-open reaches of space. You can stand on a Moon as it rotates on its axis, watching the sun rise and fall! Or Cargo and Kiosks that will open the possibility of Professions by allowing Players to earn money as a Trader, Hauler or Pirate. Of course Haulers need protection and Pirates need hunting, which creates opportunities for Mercenaries and Bounty Hunters via the new MobiGlas Mission App. Or the debut of Subsumption’s Mission system which provides a scalable and flexible system that is tightly integrated with our new AI systems, allowing us to generate challenging encounters and scenarios on the fly as well as creating a structure for multipart and narrative missions longer term.



I could go on for a few more pages as there are so many new features and content that will be arriving in the next release but in the spirit of TL;DR go to here; to see a detailed list of the Star Citizen Alpha 3.0 Features.

Star Citizen 3.0 Alpha is just the first step though. We’ve decided to share our longer roadmap through the rest of the year, so you can have visibility on what parts of the Stanton System come online and when, along with the associated gameplay. Our plan is to have two more releases in the LIVE branch of Star Citizen this year after 3.0 that fill out the Stanton System beyond what we outlined last year.

It’s a pretty big deal to share the schedule of our longer term roadmap, but we felt that it would help with everyone’s visibility on when certain features and content can be expected and understanding when things take longer or priorities shift due to unforeseen problems. We would not be here without all of your support and in some ways the Community is an extension of the development team providing the funding and the feedback on the huge undertaking we are doing.

No one has ever attempted to build a game as ambitious as Star Citizen and I doubt any Publisher would have the patience or stamina that it requires to build something that breaks molds the way Star Citizen does. 3.0 with its Planetary Tech is a testimony to the power of Crowdfunding and an enthusiastic, empowered Community. Myself and the team and eternally thankful to be able to build Star Citizen the right way, being able to take the time to engineer things for the long term, a way that will allow the universe to flourish for years to come. Together we are making history.

See you in the ‘Verse!
Four years ago today the initial Crowd Funding Campaign for Star Citizen came to a close with equal amounts of exhilaration and exhaustion.

I am always humbled by the incredible response that Star Citizen received from space sim fans and PC gamers. The groundswell that swept up the project from its announcement and carried it forward ever since has been something the team and I have never taken for granted.

Thanks to all of your support, we’ve been able to expand the scope of Star Citizen to create a living, breathing universe. No other game tries to deliver the scale and fidelity that Star Citizen does with its detailed worlds that can have you walking through a dense jungle, wandering the dark alleyways of a futuristic city, landing on a space station orbiting a moon, or piloting a space ship across vast star systems teeming with activity, all from a seamless first person viewpoint.

One of the first Star Citizen concepts ever revealed
One of the first Star Citizen concepts ever revealed
Your contributions have enabled us to hire some of the best and brightest in the video game business. The planetary tech we showed at Gamescom and CitizenCon is a prime example of something that only became possible with your continued support. We now stand at four internal studios and 377 employees all dedicated to building the best game we can. We are not building something to be played for a week and then discarded, we are building Star Citizen to be an online destination that can grow and flourish for years to come.

With this ambition comes a price. Not just in the salaries of the hundreds of people pouring their hearts into the project, but in the unpredictability of the groundbreaking technology that we need to develop to achieve a game of this scale and detail. We have taken a lot of flak over the last couple of years for the extending timeline of Star Citizen, but the simple fact is that game development, especially game development on the scale of Star Citizen, is complicated. If you talk to any developer that works on large titles they will tell you that schedules, especially early in the development cycle, move all the time. Most people never see this because a publisher won’t announce a project publicly until it is very far along; normally at least in Alpha, with all the technology and gameplay R&D completed. Even then, the timelines can be unpredictable as can be seen in the delays on big name titles from publishers.

With Star Citizen, we never had the luxury of developing behind closed doors until all the technology has been built. We’ve been public since before we opened the doors of our first office in early 2013.

Having the participation and feedback from all of you as we build Star Citizen block by block is vital to making a game that will stand the test of time. Polish and iteration help make good games great and we have the opportunity to do this with the participation of an engaged and active user base. That’s a luxury that most other games don’t have.

Open Development does have its drawbacks. Not everyone understands the process or how difficult it can be. We have always tried to be open and share our progress. We refactored Around the Verse to focus more on developers showing and talking about their work to help give insight into the process. Our monthly reports have more information than any monthly report I had to do for Electronic Arts or Microsoft when at Origin or Digital Anvil.

The only thing we currently don’t share is internal estimates on completion and dates.

As you know we’ve not been keen to give hard dates on the project after the initial set of dates which we had estimated when the project was a lot smaller in scope. When I’ve talked about releases, I’ve always qualified any discussion of timing with “we’re hoping to” or “the goal is” to give a rough timeline for people, but unfortunately some people often tend to forget the qualifiers and treated my comments nonetheless as a promise.

Because of this we have been reticent to share our internal timelines, even with caveats, as it always seems to cause trouble; one section of the community gets annoyed because things are perceived as late while another gets annoyed wondering why we shared dates at all if they aren’t solid. Of course even when we don’t give dates we have yet another part of the community getting annoyed because they feel left in the dark and have no idea when the next build will drop.

Basically it is a Kobayashi Maru.

I’ve reflected long and hard on this dilemma and have concluded, to quote another Eighties film, “the only winning move is not to play.”

What if we didn’t give you just an estimated date, but instead shared our internal schedule? No filter, no hedging. You see what we see.

Whether or not to share this kind of information has been a long running debate among the team here at Cloud Imperium Games. Target dates are not release dates, and everything you see will shift at some point, sometimes slightly and sometimes wildly. The danger in doing this has always been that casual observers will not understand this, that there will be an outcry about delays every time we update the page.

We’ve taken stock, thought through everything and decided that, while that is a risk, above all we trust the community that has given us so much support. The community that has let us focus our passions on this incredible project. You have allowed us to take this journey, you have tracked and followed so much of how game development works… and now we think it is right to further part the curtain and share with you our production process.

So for Star Citizen Alpha 2.6 we’re going to share our internal schedule and its breakouts on a weekly basis. These are the very same schedules we update daily and are circulated internally on our intra-studio hand-offs with a few exceptions: the individual developer names assigned to the tasks will be omitted (for obvious reasons), we’ll remove the JIRA details and we’ll modify the technical wording to make it readable for a wider audience, but otherwise, when something changes, slips or is completed, you will know.

A sample of the production schedule charts we will be updating for you
A sample of the production schedule charts we will be updating for you
This schedule will always be available on the RSI Website and we will be updating this page weekly with a snap shot of our internal schedule.

We take the process of production very seriously and spend a lot of time on improving our ability in this area. Our worldwide Production Team is twenty-five strong and they are the backbone that drives our development forward. They work closely with developers to break down and create tasks, chase up task completion daily, update their respective team’s schedules, encourage and strengthen open communication by organizing meetings, agendas, and creating action items to help push the project forward day by day. The Production Team has many collective years with some of the biggest developers, publishers and games. They are like the rest of the CIG team, World Class.

Game development is, at its very heart, a process of constant improvement. We view our communications as part of this process, whether that means improving the quality of our videos or finding new ways to share information with our community. I hope you enjoy this new, even more detailed look at Star Citizen’s development.

If this initiative is well received, then we will continue this process as we move onto the next milestone.

The Anniversary Livestream
This afternoon, at 1 PM Pacific, we are kicking off the fourth Star Citizen Anniversary Livestream. If you’ve discovered Star Citizen more recently, the anniversary livestream celebrates the last day of Star Citizen’s original crowd funding campaign. Back in 2012, we celebrated the incredible support we received with a 24-hour livestream. Today, we have too much work to do to break from it for a full day, but we want to honor the spirit of the campaign by appearing live and celebrating our passion for what we’re doing.

The 85X, new in SC Alpha 2.6
The 85X, new in SC Alpha 2.6
The livestream will be followed by a weeklong sale. This year, we are patterning the event after an in-universe ‘air show’ called the Intergalactic Aerospace Expo. All of our companies, from Esperia to Aegis, will present their ship lineups with a different company’s spacecraft showcased each day (along with some special surprises you’ll learn more about during the stream). If you’ve missed out on a ship in the past that you’ve been itching to pick up, this is your chance; if you’re happy with your current fleet, I hope you enjoy some of the additional materials and content we have put together for the event.

With that in mind, I wanted to take a moment to address a common question: why we do ship sales.

First and foremost, I want to stress that the universe will always be open to anyone with a starter package. No backer is being asked to pay more to enter the game world or to unlock some otherwise unavailable endgame content. Your initial Aurora or Mustang is your ticket to a bigger universe where you can earn your fortune and make your name.

If you chose to buy an additional or bigger ship, you are doing this primarily to support the project. The backers that choose to purchase concept ships are helping us add top tier talent to the game, expand our development tools and facilities and give us the time and bandwidth to pursue the kind of pure creativity that continues to make this project so exciting.

The additional ships are rewards for helping expand our dream, to make sure we continue to go above and beyond what we set out to create. Every ship you can buy now will be available in the finished game, for purchase with in game currency. But early supporters receive some convenient rewards (such as LTI) and the option of having a different starting experience with larger or role-specific ship designs. We feel this is the least we can do for the portion of the community that continues to support us well past what they need to contribute to play Star Citizen. We feel comfortable with this exchange as Star Citizen is not a stats based MMO with typical end game content. Just like real life there is no real end game in Star Citizen. It is more about what you want to do. Do you want to be a fighter? A trader? An explorer? A miner? A pirate? Player skill counts heavily as well as the role the ship was designed for. There is no ship that will sweep all before it. Different ships are needed for different situations. Having an Idris does not mean you will crush all before you, but an Idris manned by a group of friends that work together will be formidable. However, it’s a pretty bad bulk cargo carrier or mining ship, and if you’re chasing nimble outlaws through a dense asteroid field, you’re likely to take quite a bit of collateral damage and be left in the dust.

The desire to continue to improve Star Citizen is also why we have begun offering an incentive to purchase a new concept with fresh money rather than melting a ship and using store credit. We offer backers a more comprehensive system for melting and refactoring their pledges than we had ever dreamed possible back in 2012, which is a system I believe no other game offers, and as a result you can often swap to a more favored ship without impacting funding at all. We built this to allow you all to be able to purchase a ship with confidence, knowing that if something you like better comes along you can switch out to it with minimal hassle and no loss. We do not intend to change this system, but maintaining it means that we need to find other ways to encourage new contributions rather than just recycling old ones as the continued funding means we can continue to make the game as good as it possibly can be. Going forward, these cash sales will focus on newly introduced concept ships and top tier limited capital ships.

Having said all this I want to reinforce that you should only participate in the anniversary sale as a way of supporting the project. There is no need to own anything other than basic starter ship if you just want to have some fun. You will be able to earn all the ships we offer in these sales once Star Citizen goes live.

With that, I would like to wish every backer a happy fourth anniversary and thank our subscribers whose additional support allows us to put on events like this. To all of you, Star Citizen is what you are making it… and you are making it something that I believe will provide an incredible escape to people around the world. Every day, we get closer to our shared dream of a living, breathing science fiction universe where we can immerse ourselves like never before. That’s the dream that keeps us working as hard as we can on this project and it’s something I hope you will continue to support and celebrate. There’s more work to do, but with every production milestone, with every community event, with every bright idea made code I know we are getting closer to that most important promise: we’ll see you in the ‘Verse.
There’s a new universe in the works! Last week, a project called Dual Universe kicked off a crowd funding campaign and the team behind it, Novaquark, is aiming to do something massive: create a single-shard, persistent universe that won’t just be played… it will be inhabited. To make this possible, they’re aiming to give the player as much freedom as possible to have a real impact on their surroundings. Players will have control over everything from the world’s economy to the designs of their bases and spacecraft. The preliminary work they’ve done looks fantastic, and I think it has the potential to be truly outstanding.

The customization systems in Dual Universe look to be very impressive, an example of the old ‘minutes to play, lifetime to master’ aspect that rules game design. Creating a simple ship or station in their system is quick… but you also have full control over everything from the 3D appearance to the under-the-hood LUA scripts that control how the actual parts function and work together. Think Minecraft in a science fiction world you help to define.

Dual Universe is a perfect example of why crowdfunding is important. It’s something big and bold that I am pretty sure a traditional publisher wouldn’t feel comfortable greenlighting. If you are interested in massive space games (and I have reason to believe that many reading this are!) then I encourage you to check out Dual Universe’s trailer below and their Kickstarter site here. There is certainly quite a few similarities between what Dual Universe and Star Citizen are both aiming to achieve, but that’s not a bad thing! Space games are not a zero sum game. Different games, even with similar feature sets can have wildly different sensibilities and play experiences. Choice and a little friendly competition is always a good thing.

It’s a great time for space games, and I look forward to welcoming Dual Universe to the growing brotherhood.

This coming year will be an even bigger year than 2014 – the FPS module will go live to backers, we will be giving our first drops of the Persistent universe, starting with the Planetside social module, the multi-crew Arena Commander and the first Episode of Squadron 42.

2015 is where the game will be shaped. And it will be shaped with your input. So get in the game and let us know what works and what doesn’t for you!

It’s going to be a lot of work, but also a lot of fun and I couldn’t imagine doing it with a better group of people than group of developers working on the game and the amazing Star Citizen community.
As you know, I like to use this space to highlight crowd funding efforts that I feel are deserving of your attention. Today, I’d like to point you to a project called Star Traders, currently in the midst of its Kickstarter campaign. Another space game? Yes. And like a lot of the games I love, it’s set in a distant future filled with starships, intergalactic trading and epic heroes. Unlike other projects I’ve written about, though, Star Trades doesn’t’ need an overclocked CPU or the hottest graphics card… because it’s a board game!

Star Traders follows the grand tradition of games like Risk and Solarquest by aiming straight at the heart of good game design: it’s simple to play but frustratingly difficult to master. The game is designed to function at a number of different levels, with the end result being a range of game types that will appeal to every skill level. With the most basic rule set, Star Trader can be enjoyed in an hour by all ages, while using the most complex options can make for the kind of legendary all-night game sessions that define the hobby.

Many of you already know the Star Citizen connection: the game’s creators, David Ladyman and Ryan Archer, have done master-class work in helping create our ‘Verse these past three years. David has been responsible for putting together our brochures, manuals and magazine, and Ryan is the artist behind many of our blueprint images and a lot of what appears in Jump Point (his UEE squadron patches are a particular favorite of mine.) I’ve also had the privilege of working with David on almost every title I did at Origin and on the Wing Commander film (he put together a technical manual published alongside the movie.) You can read more about David and his extensive history making games here.

I mention that connection because I believe it’s a key element of crowd funding: supporting good people. I can tell you from many years of experience that David (and Ryan) will go above and beyond to make their dream a reality, and that they’re true artists: interested in creating something new that others will enjoy. They’ve also scattered some Star Citizen Easter eggs in the game itself… and even asked Sandi and I to appear as characters. Good people, good game design and a desire to make something great. What better combination could there be? I’m eager to get my own copy and I encourage you to check out their video below, visit their project page and consider pledging if you enjoy great board games!

— Chris Roberts

P.S. – Don’t worry, David and Ryan aren’t going anywhere! Their work on Star Citizen happens on a contract basis, and so they’ll continue delivering Jump Point and all the art you’ve come to know. We don’t have any stake in Star Traders, but I know that it’s always best to let creative people pursue their dreams!
As 2015 draws to a close, I would like to thank everyone in the Star Citizen community for your incredible support. It’s amazing to think that this journey started out just over three years ago with the simple idea that there had to be more people out there than myself who liked space and PC games. Why weren’t the big publishers interested in supporting space games? Why did they think the PC wasn’t a viable platform?

To say that all of you proved them wrong is an understatement. To date, you’ve done that to the tune of over $102 million in crowd funding raised to build this game and a million Citizens signing up to follow what we’re doing here. It’s the game I’ve been dreaming about ever since the moment I learned to program… and I’m pretty sure it’s the game all of you have been dreaming about, too!

For making all of this possible, I can only say: thank you. With this funding we are now building a game that can compete with any AAA publisher backed game out there. No corporate suits deciding what franchise to milk or license. I promised a long time ago that the funds that we raise prior to what we consider the commercial release of Star Citizen would go towards additional development. Because of all of your support we can build this game bigger and better than anyone thought possible a few years ago.

With big numbers comes big attention. Some people look at the number and say “Why should they have all that money?” Well it’s because you want to build a big, bold game that doesn’t compromise! This is the secret. The additional money that comes in doesn’t go towards dividends for shareholders or making analysts happy with our profitability. It gets invested into making Star Citizen the best it can be. Hiring the best talent possible and allowing them to reach for the stars. Your contributions are going towards making the game better for you and all your friends. How could that possibly be a bad thing?

Technology like the procedural planet that we demonstrated in the Pupil to Planet demo during the December livestream is a direct result of your contributions. Without it we wouldn’t have the Frankfurt office or the technical wizards that reside there. Or the incredibly talented team in Manchester! Without the continued support and enthusiasm of the best community in gaming we would have never been able to hire up in the UK, Germany or expand our US development team. Thanks to you, we have been able to build a truly world class team.

But Star Citizen isn’t really about the money, that’s just what’s allowing us to build a game of the ambition and fidelity that people thought wouldn’t be possible.

A huge milestone towards achieving this goal was the release of Star Citizen Alpha 2.0 earlier this month, with the ability to play in a huge area (the biggest yet in gaming thanks to 64 bit floating point positional coordinates) and offering up all of these exciting options in that world: walking around a space station on foot or boarding a space ship by yourself or with friends… walk around that ship and/or have your friends man various stations while you are flying… fly thousands or even hundreds of thousands of kilometers, engage in ship to ship combat against AI or other players, exit your ship to EVA and explore space stations… engage in FPS combat (on foot or in EVA), rescue stranded players, perform various missions. All of this happens seamlessly without loading screens at a fidelity and scale that has not been seen before in any game.

Star Citizen Alpha 2.0 is the first time that you can see how the various elements; space combat, FPS, social interaction, huge play spaces will all fit together into one seamless holistic game experience. You can really see the dawn of the first person universe. Combining the fidelity that we are aiming for with the scale we want has always been our biggest technical challenge. We’re aiming for detail that is as good or better than any AAA first / third person game but that can go from picking out details from several centimeters away to seeing planets hundreds of thousands of kilometers in the distance, all simulated and rendered from the 1st person view of your avatar that can go anywhere.

2.0 shows the naysayers it can be done!

We still have a lot of work to do, many game systems to complete, content to generate, code to optimize, bugs to squash but you can now see what Star Citizen will feel like and in 2.0 you can get an experience you can’t get with any other game. I know that’s a pretty bold claim to make but you just have to visit our forums, or Reddit, or watch hundreds of YouTube videos or Twitch streams to see this happening every day.

The aspect that most excites me is that players are building their own narrative around what happened to them in their 2.0 game sessions. It reminds of when Wing Commander first came out and I noticed people talking about their wingmen / women as real people – not just a game character who you should team up with to complete a mission or level. Instead people were picking their flying partner based on personality and who they liked. That was the moment that I realized something special was happening and the whole was more than the sum of the parts.

Just imagine what you can do with the Star Citizen Alpha 2.0 experience but with even more content and features? More locations and interactions? It’s not really a space sim as we understand them. I find it hard to put my finger on why it seems so liberating but I think the ability to really feel like you can go anywhere and have the universe rendered with such detail and fidelity gives a different sense of immersing oneself in a game. With a lot of other space games, the experience still feels like a game. This feels different. You can even see it in the player behavior in 2.0. There is no win. Just experience and adventure.

And this is just the beginning!

What’s coming next?
Star Citizen Alpha 2.1 goes live to all backers on the PTU today. 2.1 includes a couple of new ships; the re-modeled Freelancer is now flyable and the Sabre, the new experimental medium fighter that we announced at CitizenCon 2015 is hangar ready. Both the Freelancer and the Sabre have benefited from the new ship modeling processes that the Ship Team has developed. Once a manufacturer’s style and look has been defined and we have built out its material set, the process of taking a ship from detailed 3D concept to in-game is much faster than it was previously. As we flesh out the various manufacturers in this manner expect to see quicker turn around from concept to in-game.

Going forward we will be changing our patch release strategy to be less feature driven and more date driven. Our goal is to release a new update every month (so January’s would be SC Alpha 2.2). We have many features in development separate to the release stream, and the idea is that we assess which features are ready for prime time a few weeks out from the release and then greenlight them for inclusion in that month’s release. We would then have a good PTU test, make sure the features really are ready for primetime, fixing up the issues we see and in the case of a feature needing more work, we would pull it out of the release. Physicalized EVA is an example of this. After testing in PTU we felt we needed to do some more work in order to polish it for better usability in certain circumstances.

We feel like this strategy will be better for both development and the community at large. It will ensure constant updates and patches and a good flow of features. But as we’re not defining which features make a particular release, we won’t be in a situation like we were earlier this year where the delays on the FPS development in Star Citizen ended up blocking game updates for the community.

With 2.0 as our foundation, which combines the various game modes into one holistic experience we now have a good strong framework for any new feature updates whether they involve FPS, ship, social or planetside. Expect to see us flesh out a huge amount of the Persistent Universe and its functionality in this coming year.

In addition to this we’ll be hard at work in completing Squadron 42, which is something I’m incredibly excited about. I had a lot of fun working with a great script and amazing set of actors earlier this year and it’s a lot of fun to start seeing all this come alive inside the engine. I will be personally spending a lot of time in the UK with the Foundry 42 team in 2016 closing out Squadron 42 for all of you to play. I can’t wait as Squadron 42 really is how I would have made a next generation Wing Commander. The fluidity that is so compelling in 2.0 only serves to enhance the feeling of immersion and being inside the story for Squadron 42. Combine this with some amazing performances and technology that can transcribe the performance into our game engine… I think the sense of emotional connection to the characters and story will take it to a whole other level than people are used to.

2016 is going to be a great year for Star Citizen!

Vanduul War Bonds
Vanduul War Bonds
I’d like to end the year by thanking everyone who is working to make Star Citizen better than I had thought possible. First of all, our amazing, million-strong community. Without you, we would not be here today. Your pledges have made all this possible… the sharing of your passion with others have allowed us to grow… and your excitement and creativity routinely reinvigorate the development team. I can’t properly express what you have meant to Star Citizen. In honor of the $100 million milestone, we’re attributing a UEE War Bond to each of your Hangars. The bond will be issued in the year you started backing (2942 for 2012, 2943 for 2013 and so on). For now, it’s just a small piece of decoration… and someday, when this cruel war with the Vanduul comes to an end, we’ll give you the option to redeem it for credits! (A small example of the kind of fun, immersive things a larger team lets us add to the game.) A special thank you to Algared, the backer who pushed crowd funding into the triple digits. Here’s to our “$100 million dollar man”… and everyone else who got us here.

Next, the incredible development teams around the world who have already transmuted Star Citizen from imagination into reality. I am honored to work with several hundred of the most talented game developers in the world, people who are truly passionate about this project in the same way I am. We have come so far from the tiny original troop of volunteers working to build the proof of concept demo and the crowd funding campaign. I know how hard each of you work, how much you put into Star Citizen. I know how much each of you believes in the universe we’re creating. And most importantly, I know that we will all someday look back, like the backers who supported us, and find incredible satisfaction in these five words: I helped make Star Citizen.

Here are some other ‘end of year’ numbers that speak to the incredible scale of what we’re doing on Star Citizen:

The Roberts Space Industries website served 178 million page views, with over 9.5 million visitors in 2015
Citizens have downloaded more than 30 petabytes of content this year.
80,000 backers have explored Crusader in 2.0 in the week since its launch.
The development team created 16,503 tasks in 2015 and resolved over 15,000 of them.
Developers made 204,716 Perforce checkins/changelists.
The team generated an average of 6 game builds per day.
QA has generated over 17,000 bug tickets this year, and the bugsmashers have since resolved almost 12,000 of those.
Finally, I would like to add a sincere thanks and well wishes to the other development teams around the world that share in our passion for space sims. I often see arguments online about which game to play; Star Citizen or Elite, Elite or No Man’s Sky and so on. The truth is that there’s no right answer: the space gaming renaissance is nothing but good news for gamers everywhere. Just as Wing Commander and X-Wing improved one another through competition, so too has Star Citizen been improved by other space games in development. The fantastic teams behind Elite: Dangerous, No Man’s Sky, EVERSPACE, Infinity: Battlescape and others inspire us daily. I wish you and anyone else expanding the frontiers of space and PC gaming all the best for 2016 and beyond!

Thank you all. I hope that everyone has a merry Christmas, a happy holiday and that you will join us again in 2016 for an incredible new year!
I’m happy to announce that the space game renaissance is upon us! Joining the ranks of Star Citizen, Elite Dangerous, No Man’s Sky, EVERSPACE (and others!) is now Infinity Battlescape, a new crowd-funded project from I-Novae Studios. As you know, I like to highlight awesome crowd funded projects that I think the Star Citizen community would be interested in… and Infinity Battlescape seems like the perfect candidate!

Infinity Battlescape intends to offer hundreds of players the chance to take part in a massive furball across a procedurally generated star system with seamless ground-to-space transitions! With Newtonian physics and support for community modding, this one looks like a real winner. Infinity Battlescape’s engine has been in development for quite a while and it’s very exciting that the team has now taken it beyond the tech demo stage into a crowd funding campaign. They’ve kicked off the campaign with a working prototype that looks, in a word, spectacular… so there’s plenty of gameplay footage to check out today!

If you’re interested in learning more about what looks to be another great space adventure, I encourage you to check out the Infinity Battlescape trailer (below) and their Kickstarter pledge page. And to the team behind the game, I’d like to say good luck… and thank you for helping bring space games back to the PC!
If there was ever a milestone that deserved a letter to the community it was this. When I first started on this adventure I would have never dreamed that we would ever this many people and this much support in building Star Citizen. It’s amazing to have a community and team that believe so fervently in what is being built… Say it loud: PC games are back, space combat games are back… we are making Star Citizen possible!

We’ve put a great deal of thought into what would be an appropriate update to celebrate this milestone. But wait! Before we continue, it seems there’s an urgent comm-link coming through…
It should come as no surprise that I love a good interstellar dogfight… and EVERSPACE from ROCKFISH games looks to deliver exactly that! The team behind Galaxy on Fire (a genuinely good space combat game for iOS) is back to craft a beautiful space shooter for the PC… and what they’ve released so far has been very impressive! Looking at their Kickstarter presentation, the environmental effects are top-notch (check out the asteroid slicing) and the game itself looks like a whole lot of fun. The project has just hit its Kickstarter goal with nine days remaining and is getting ready to move on to stretch goals… so I thought it would be good to share with the Star Citizen community that might not have seen it yet.

Now, I know what you’re thinking: aren’t these guys our competition? Like fighter pilots that argue over who’s flying the hottest aircraft, the conversation between space gamers has always inevitably turned to who supports the best game, with plenty of ribbing (good natured and otherwise) in every direction. Whether it was Wing Commander versus X-Wing in the 1990s or Star Citizen compared to Elite: Dangerous today, we all like a good argument! But just like pilots, at the end of the day we aren’t truly competitors… we’re all part of a band of brothers and the success of any great project buoys us all. As I’ve said since the beginning: Star Citizen isn’t truly a success unless it helps bring back high quality PC games in general… and space games in particular!

So, with that in mind I encourage you to check out EVERSPACE. The team at ROCKFISH is doing some outstanding work, and I think anyone who backed Star Citizen would be interested in learning more! The game is more action-focused than ours, and should allow for some great, fast-paced gameplay that’ll stand alongside Star Citizen, No Man’s Sky, Elite and all the others. You can view their crowdfunding trailer below, check out their Kickstarter page here, or learn more about the project at everspace-game.com.
Now that I am back in Los Angeles I thought I would write a letter to all of you who have backed Star Citizen. I haven’t had the chance to communicate to everyone as frequently as I normally have due to my directing duties on the Squadron 42 performance capture shoot. Directing a shoot is a pretty intensive affair which absorbed most of my time. The rest of the hours I wasn’t sleeping were taken up with the business of directing a game as large as Star Citizen with video conferences and emails or online collaboration with the six development studios spread across two continents and six time zones. To help address some of the questions that came up during the shoot, I’ve put together a special 10 for the Chairman companion piece to this letter, which you can find here.

A week ago Wednesday we wrapped the main performance and motion capture for Squadron 42, Episode 1, after 66 shooting days. We started shooting on March 31st at Ealing Studios in London and completed principal performance and motion capture on July 8th. This is more shooting days than any film I’ve ever been involved with! I directed my last scene on Friday July 3rd, leaving David Haddock, our lead writer, who along with William Weissbaum wrote the Squadron 42 script, to direct the last three days of secondary character “wild lines” and motion sets the following Monday through Wednesday.

A GRAND TOUR
That Monday I took a train up to Wilmslow to the Foundry 42 UK Office to spend some time with the Squadron 42 development team in person as well as gather key people from our various studios and our technical partners for a technical summit on our character and facial animation technology and pipeline. Like everything on Star Citizen and Squadron 42 we are aiming to push the envelope – with the tech we are working on for animation, shaders and AI we are aiming to give you a fluid immersion inside the story of Squadron 42 and later the bigger world of the Persistent Universe of Star Citizen, in a way that conveys the emotional subtlety of film. It’s one of the reasons why our performance capture shoot was so long – maybe 10% of the scenes we shot were for cinematics, the rest were all for scenes where we allow full player control that play out during game control from your POV. Most games just record voiceovers for these types of scenes over a few days, but for us it was important to capture the full performance of our amazing cast. This allows us to then blend the captured performance of the actor’s face and body with other motions to adjust the game character’s looks and movement so they react in a natural manner to the player’s actions (whatever they may be). At the fidelity we are going for we are definitely breaking new ground, but luckily we are working with some of the leading companies and people in the area of scanning real people and bringing their performances into 3D in the most life-like way. 3 Lateral and Cubic Motion are well known for their amazing work in this field and we are partnering with them to push performance capture and real time playback beyond what you have seen in a game before. Internally we have been hiring up some incredible talent, including the architect of the CryEngine animation system, who recently joined us in Frankfurt.




Some photos from my adventure in London
Some photos from my adventure in London
Wednesday night I flew with my brother Erin to Frankfurt Germany to visit the German Foundry 42 development studio, where the 22 newest members of the Star Citizen family have just moved into their new home, after being crammed into temporary offices for the last few months. The energy and enthusiasm there was fantastic to experience first-hand. We have been lucky enough to have some of the best technologists and game developers in the business join us these past few months, the very people who were involved in building the engine we are using. These are guys who did things with a PC in 2003 and 2006 that no one thought possible. Star Citizen is lucky to have them and we spent Thursday and Friday going over our engine and technology road map, as well as reviewing some of the work they have been doing these last months. As we have mentioned before, Star Citizen (and even Squadron 42) presents a challenge in terms of detail and scale that no game has tackled successfully to date. To do what the game requires there needs to be a different approach to how things are organized, rendered and updated. This is why we spent eight months converting the engine to 64 bit precision and why we have developed some new technologies like the Zone system and local grids, which fundamentally change how the engine organizes, streams, updates and renders objects in the world (or more accurately: the ‘verse). We can now manage one massive play area with all sorts of objects; single seat fighters, multi crew ships, capital ships with hundreds of rooms and thousands of objects inside, huge space stations or incredibly detailed landing environments. We will be showing you the first preview of this in action at Gamescom. We still have lots of work to do, not the least being the network side of things, to be able to update all this with a decent amount of players participating. Even in the early stages it is incredibly exhilarating.

Squadron 42 concept art, the 
Squadron 42 concept art, the "Chop Shop"
Squadron 42 is going to be something special. I could feel it on set with the performances we were getting, with me knowing how we can bring those into the game. Squadron 42 is going to be like this amazing sci-fi movie where instead of just watching, you truly feel you’re in the world, emotionally connected to the other characters in the story. The action goes fluidly from space, to ship board, to on-foot gun battles aboard ships, stations and asteroid bases – all from the same 1st person point of view, all fluidly blending with no loading screens.

I look at the work Tony is spearheading on the Persistent Universe side: some of the environments we are constructing, the rendering and graphics technology we have in the pipeline to render these worlds in a fluid manner to go from space flight to being on-foot at your destination. Also the attention Tony is spending on making sure there are many different careers and roles you can play in the bigger universe. I know the dream game that I have always wanted to make and that you all want to play and backed for is closer than ever.

I have never been more excited by what we are building then I am now.

That’s not to say I did not come home to a little drama :)


STAR MARINE & PRODUCTION
It seems some gaming outlets got a little confused with my last FPS letter, which was no different to the one that we did back in May to let people know where we were on Star Marine / the FPS module. As you all know we are shy of announcing firm dates for module releases until they are in the Public Test Universe (PTU) as it’s hard to predict exact dates in open development, especially in the stages that still involve R&D, unless you build in large time buffers. We have been burned by this multiple times before so I have heeded all your wishes to not give out dates until we are sure. Perhaps we stressed the point a little too strongly as suddenly gaming websites were running with the headline, “Star Citizen FPS delayed indefinitely!” which was unfortunate as this phrase is usually a euphemism for a project being put on indefinite hold or canceled.

Don’t worry, it’s not! We’re hard at work on the FPS – as you can see from our update on Friday – and you will have it in your hands sooner rather than later.

Shortly after the FPS flap, the news that the LA Studio’s Executive Producer, Alex Mayberry, had left for personal reasons after a year on the job combined with a couple of other staff departures that we had previously announced had some people worrying about whether they should be concerned.

With a company the size of CIG and its subsidiaries there is always going to be turnover. We are a very large company now, dedicated entirely to making Star Citizen and Squadron 42. We have four development studios: Los Angeles, Austin, Wilmslow, UK and Frankfurt, Germany. Our internal headcount has gone from five at the end of 2012 to 59 at the end of 2013 to 183 at the end of 2014 and to 255 now. That’s some pretty huge growth. The turnover at CIG is no more or less than it was at Origin, EA, Digital Anvil or Microsoft when I was making games there. The difference is that since we conduct our development in an open manner people get the opportunity to know some of the individuals working on the game, in a way you wouldn’t with a normal publisher, so a departure becomes more noticeable. Sometimes an employee may get an opportunity to go elsewhere in a role they feel will be more rewarding personally. Sometimes our breakneck pace of development is too much, or sometimes people just want to make a change for personal reasons.

The Foundry 42 DE team!
The Foundry 42 DE team!
We made a conscious decision early on to go where the developers were as opposed to making them come to one place. If I hadn’t done this we would only have an office in LA as that’s where I live, but I decided in today’s world with fast Internet (we run 1 Gigabit connections at all our offices), Cloud and online sharing technology we don’t have to force talented people to leave their homes to work on Star Citizen. This approach has allowed us to staff up with some of the best people in the business. The UK and German office are key examples of this. This approach of distributed development is not new or unusual but it does require you to work hard to keep all locations working together as harmoniously as possible.

As such, we are constantly reassessing our development structure and methodology to improve our efficiency. With Alex’s departure we took the opportunity to streamline all production leadership under Erin. Erin has an amazing track record, delivering more than $500M worth of Lego games during his seven years of running Traveler’s Tales Fusion, not to mention the titles he has built with me at Origin, EA and Digital Anvil. I had asked Erin to take on this role originally when he joined but at the time he wanted to concentrate on building up Foundry 42. Now with Foundry 42 as our largest studio (between Wilmslow and Frankfurt there are 138 people) and those teams operating efficiently, Erin felt comfortable taking on a wider role. I could not be happier as he has been with me since the first Wing Commander and the best producer / production executive I know.



Meanwhile, the PU team in Austin is working on the next planet in the ArcCorp system
Meanwhile, the PU team in Austin is working on the next planet in the ArcCorp system
OPEN DEVELOPMENT
If you have followed Star Citizen from our kickoff in October, 2012, you know that the game we’re building today is a bigger and more technically accomplished project than I thought was possible back then. The original crowd funding goal was to raise enough money to deliver regular community updates, access to the multiplayer dogfighting alpha and a single player campaign called Squadron 42. You can see the first goal, which was achieved on 25th of October 2012 here. It’s no secret that I originally thought I would have to build a smaller game first and then over time add features and content to get close to the full living universe that I have always wanted to realize. This community came together and, both through your financial support and your belief in the project, made something incredible possible. You went above and beyond in backing our dream and so we are going to, also. Because of you, we’re building cities where I had hoped for just landing pads, we’re building armadas of starships where I asked for squadrons and we’re populating a living, breathing world in ways I didn’t dare to dream of in 2012.

You all know that already; you’ve lived that. You’ve seen Star Citizen evolve and start to come together. You’ve watched our atoms form molecules, our modules form a real, playable game (that you can boot up and play today!). There are people out there who are going to tell you that this is all a BAD THING. That it’s ‘feature creep’ and we should make a smaller, less impressive game for the sake of having it out more quickly or in order to meet artificial deadlines. Now I’ll answer those claims in one word: Bullshit!

Star Citizen matters BECAUSE it is big, because it is a bold dream. It is something everyone else is scared to try. You didn’t back Star Citizen because you want what you’ve seen before. You’re here and reading this because we are willing to go big, to do the things that terrify publishers. You’ve trusted us with your money so we can build a game, not line our pockets. And we sure as hell didn’t run this campaign so we could put that money in the bank, guarantee ourselves a profit and turn out some flimsy replica of a game I’ve made before. You went all in supporting us and we’ve gone all in making the game. Is Star Citizen today a bigger goal than I imagined in 2012? Absolutely. Is that a bad thing? Absolutely not: it’s the whole damn point.




Will it take longer to deliver all this? Of course! When the scope changes, the amount of time it will take to deliver all the features naturally increases. This is something we are acutely aware of. How do we balance the mutually conflicting wants of the community; to have this hugely ambitious game, but not wait forever for it?

Our answer is to embrace open development and share features and functionality that will go into the final game before everything is completed. Originally we had just planned to share a multiplayer dogfighting alpha and then the beta of the game (which would have just been Squadron 42). As we smashed every stretch goal, and continued to power through additional ones, it was pretty apparent we had to find a way to keep people engaged while we were building this virtual universe. In today’s 24/7 short attention-span world people don’t have the patience to wait around for years. This is why we decided on multiple modules: the Hangar, so you could first see your ships and walk around them in the manner you would in the final game, then Arena Commander, to allow people to get a taste and give feedback on the basic dogfight and flight mechanics. Star Marine, which will be available shortly, is the module for backers to experience and give their feedback on the First Person Shooting component of the game. Not long after that we will be releasing the next level of Arena Commander, allowing players with bigger ships to fly them with friends, on maps that are closer in size to the huge ones you’ll have in the final game. Then we’re rolling out aspects of the Persistent Universe: first there will be just planet side environments to explore, but not long after you’ll be able to transition to space and fly to another destination, and then after that to another system. We have taken this route to allow people to experience and give feedback to make the game better as we build it. Almost no one else does this. And we’re still doing it: case in point, our first 16-player version of Arena Commander went to the PTU on Saturday! I’ve said it countless times: my goal is to make the journey of Star Citizen’s development worth the price of admission and the final game be the best bonus in the world.

So while it will take longer to build the full vision that all of you are helping to achieve by contributing your funds, our plan is to have you play large sections of it without having to wait for everything to be done like you would on a normal retail product. That is the advantage of being online and on the PC. It should be a win / win: you get to play a more limited version early, a version that is closer to the original goals, but you know the bigger, fuller featured version is coming – and the best bit is that you get it all for your initial pledge!

Is ‘feature creep’ a worry? Sure… it’s always a worry, and we are well aware of it. However, building the game to the stretch goals embraced and endorsed by the community is not feature creep! We made the decision to stop stretch goals at the end of last year. That was a hard choice to abandon one of the central tenets of crowd funding projects, the idea that the sky is the limit… but it’s one we felt we had to make for the better of the game. Today, we have a radical design that’s like nothing else in the industry and we’re building towards it every hour of every day. We count on the community’s continued support to build the game to the high level that we set out to accomplish. Allowing independent authors to do more is the point of crowd funding, and going beyond our limitations is the entire point of Star Citizen.

Occasionally I see comments out there from people who haven’t taken the time to watch the thousands of YouTube videos of people running around their ships and hangars or dogfighting in space, or visit our site to read the vast amount of information we make publicly available that call us vaporware or a glorified tech demo. Arena Commander, which is still evolving, is a better looking and playing game than a lot of finished games out there. We are maintaining a live game and building one all at the same time. It’s harder than just developing, as most companies that run online games will tell you, but it’s worth it, both to ensure you get to experience features as soon as they are ready and to make a better game in the long run.

This is all being made possible by your enthusiasm and support. As we promised since the start of the campaign, we invest every dollar raised into the game. Anyone with knowledge about game development can assess our spending based on the information we share every month. It speaks for itself that from the outset our TOS provides for an accounting to be published if we ever had to stop development before delivering. With the progress and the funds we’ve raised this is no longer an issue, but quite obviously we wouldn’t have provided for this clause, if we weren’t using your funds very carefully for the development of Star Citizen.

The rest of the team and I are immensely grateful for all your support and passion. We’re hard at work on finishing up the next Arena Commander patch, Star Marine, the Persistent Universe, Squadron 42, as well as working on something special to show you all at Gamescom!

We genuinely want people to be happy with their decision to back Star Citizen, because I and everyone else on the team passionately believe in Star Citizen. This is the dream game that all of us have wanted to build all our lives. And while I can’t promise you everything will always go smoothly or features or content won’t arrive later than we want them to, I can promise that we will never stop until we have achieved this dream.

To paraphrase a key speech from the beginning of Squadron 42;

“Several years from now, when you are surrounded by your loved ones, and they ask you what did you do during the battle for Space Sims and PC games, you can look them in the eye and say; I helped make Star Citizen.”
For the past ten weeks, I have been directing the performance capture shoot for Squadron 42 in London, next week will be the last week of the “main unit” shoot. Directing the Squadron 42 shoot has been one of the most fun and creatively rewarding things I’ve done. It’s where the story and characters written by David Haddock and William Weisbaum come to life for the first time and I can feel just how special Squadron 42 will be. The cast we have put together for Squadron 42 would not be out of place in a major motion picture. We are using the next level in performance capture, which is both motion and facial capture, allowing us to capture even the subtlest looks or moments. Every scene we capture we have between 1 and 3 cameras on every actors face, plus 50 cameras capturing their moves. This technology, combined with next generation character and facial rigs driving full 3D scans of the actors in the world of Star Citizen / Squadron 42 allows us to have emotion, nuance and subtlety that I don’t think has been seen in full player controlled gameplay before. I’m hoping that capturing this level of fidelity will make the world and story more visceral than anything I’ve done before, and will push interactive storytelling the same way Wing Commander did over its iterations. The story of Squadron 42 is going to be an experience that I think will be very special. Instead of watching a film play out in front of you it will feel like you are inside a living world, living a story that you only normally see on the big screen but it’s YOUR story, not one of some protagonist you need to associate with! By the time the shoot is over, it will have been longer than Wing Commander 4 (42 days) or even the last feature film I produced, Outlander (51 days.). You need this kind of time to capture real performance. We’re shooting something as nuanced and detailed as a film but in a way that it fuses with a fully breathable interactive world that you control the pace of. To me, this is one of the first, best results of Star Citizen’s crowd funding: the ability for the development team to live our passion rather than to conform to a publisher’s schedule or bullet points. So let me start by thanking every single backer for making this possible. You’ve allowed me and the team to do some outstanding work. I am thrilled to be here.

Now, though, I need to step away from the Squadron 42 shoot to address something that is on everyone’s minds. We initially planned to release the FPS module, which we are calling Star Marine, shortly after PAX East in April. We demonstrated a build of the module at the backer event that ran fairly well. It lacked some polish (especially with animations) and still had several technical blockers that prevented a wide scale rollout…but we felt confident enough in the work to say that it would be available for everyone soon. Unfortunately that didn’t happen. Just over two months on, we are continuing to tackle technical and gameplay-related issues. I know that there are two questions above all others that you need answered, and I will now do my best to address them.

What issues are the FPS team facing?
The tl;dr is that we feel the current build doesn’t feel like it lives up to the standards we’ve want to achieve with Star Citizen. There are several issues that will need additional time in order to deliver the first iteration of the gameplay we want you to experience. The challenges facing the FPS launch are a mix of technical blockers and gameplay issues. The most significant technical hurdle faced today is the networking backend. After attempting to work with the legacy code, we decided that we needed to drop some of the legacy technology. That meant developing what we’re calling a Generic Instance Manager (GIM) and rewriting both the Matchmaker and (for the larger project) the game Launcher from scratch. Those efforts are all going well, but they’ve all taken additional time for our engineers.

Going into further detail on the technical side of these systems, one of our big hurdles was, as noted, the creation of the GIM. This new system will be responsible for all the game servers that make up Star Citizen, and we’ve built it to have far more direct control over the internal state and operation of each game server than was available before. The GIM not only manages Arena Commander and Star Marine instances, but also provides a solid framework for instanced multi-player Hangars as well as the instanced Universe game servers that will form the persistent universe. The GIM allocates and recycles game servers at a much faster rate and in a more reliable way than before, helping to get players into the action more quickly and keeping them in their games with less incident. The development of this system, which has been ongoing for some time, has been a group effort involving engineers from around the company. Once it’s integrated, it will not only improve the Star Marine experience but also chart the ‘behind the screens’ course for Star Citizen’s future. We’re looking forward to testing it in action internally next week!

The new GIM isn’t the only ‘home grown’ system we’ve come to need for Star Marine. A second challenge has been the need to rewrite the game’s Matchmaking system from scratch, taking an entirely different approach to the process that will eliminate long waits during the Match search process. Situations that use to result in “Match Not Found” no longer exist and every player/group is guaranteed a match in a match and in shorter time than they have seen before. The Matchmaker now keeps friends together such that players in a public group will always be matched to the same team as expected. I’m happy to report that, as of this week, the new matchmaking software has been integrated and is undergoing testing.

The third process currently in progress for improving Star Citizen’s backend netcode is what we’re calling the “Phoenix” dynamic environments system. Each time the team kick off a new build of Star Citizen all the data that the servers need is automatically copied out to hard disks in Google; this is a snapshot of our game data. These disks are broken into two to three conceptual parts: Base Image (the OS plus a few other things), Logs, and Server Data (Code and Assets). When we build an environment, we mount duplicates of these disks to each Virtual Machine (VM) that we bring up. Duplicates of the snapshot are created very rapidly, around 45 seconds for 200 gigs of data. We’ve written some automation code to automatically run commands on the VM to configure it appropriately for what type of server it will become (Game, Matchmaking, Party, etc.) During this process, a new DNS entry is assigned to server based off the version of the data uploaded. When a new build is created, and we need to push it to an environment, we trigger a command that automatically shuts down all VM’s, unmounts the duplicated disks of the Base Image and Server Data disk (Log disks are always kept for troubleshooting), and then restarts the server with the new duplicates based of the new snapshot and the environment is running and ready on the new version.

This entire process takes about 8 minutes. When we want to take a QA environment that is built this way, and extend it to become a PTU environment, we send a command to our Provisioning layer and it goes out to Google, requests more VMs, builds more disk duplicates, mounts those snapshots, runs Chef commands to configure it, adds their DNS entries, and connects them to the existing infrastructure to be used. At that point we have a PTU environment. We repeat this process to build Production. Each time we expand an environment it takes about 8 to 10 minutes depending on the type of environment and the configurations we need.

The benefit of this dynamic creation and the environment expansion is threefold. First, any changed configs, misplaced settings, or broken processes are completely removed when the VMs are rebuilt using the new disk duplicates. Any configuration changes that need to persist should be made at the Chef level. Second, we can make absolutely sure that PTU and Production is the exact same environment that QA tested on, so there will be no strange differences we failed to catch in QA when we go live. The third benefit is simply speed. It is much faster to dynamically recreate environments on the fly than to recopy data each time. Those last two points are a pretty big deal. If our experience has taught us one thing it is that having a consistent test environment that can be rolled out quickly, and this new system is pretty quick. It’s a huge force multiplier for our ability to rapidly iterate our test versions, which means QA and ultimately our backers will be able to do more varied testing more quickly. The more accurate we can get versions to our QA and to our backers the better we can ultimately make the game.

These new systems and processes were initiated to replace very serious limitations in what had come before. We’re taking additional time to develop them properly and will in order to get them right we will ultimately need more for proper integration (testing, bug triage and the like.) But we’re already seeing a great improvement: the new system is far more reliable and handles more concurrent players due to improved networking protocol and a streamlined back-end service architecture. In short, doing it ourselves makes for a better game today and sets the stage for even bigger things to come!

On the gameplay side, we are dedicated to making sure the game represents what we want for first person action in the Star Citizen world. This is where things are a little less technical and more about the ‘feel’ of the experience. One of the biggest issues on this front is getting the visuals right. If you read our last design post on the FPS, you will remember that one of the ways we want this experience to stand apart is that we aren’t ‘faking’ animations: anything your character does in the first person needs to look correct when viewed in the third person by another player without duplicate ‘fake’ animations that look different to each person. Making this look right is something that’s taking more R&D time than we had anticipated. It’s a challenge that we will meet…but it’s going to require careful work. We’ve tapped the new Frankfurt studio, which is staffed by Crytek veterans who know every in and out of the engine and some key ex-Crytek leads from LA and Austin to help the team in Denver make this work.

As we continue to tackle these challenges, the FPS team is continuing to improve other areas beyond the initial spec. New characters and weapons and so on, already scheduled, are being developed while newly recorded mocap animations are going in on a regular basis…and other resources are working on more subtle map changes. For instance, artists have been conducting additional lighting and detail passes on the Gold Horizon map with an eye towards quick silhouette reads and making it easier to understand where you are in the level at any time. These kinds of passes aren’t as sexy as building a new spaceship or firing a new weapon…but they’re essential to providing the kind of detail and gameplay we want out of Star Marine.

Arena Commander, for instance, “shipped” with what we thought would be a very early version of the control system, and we’ve certainly heard no end of the debate since! Like it or not, we know that with Star Marine we need to release a build that at the very least shows people where we want to go and not just what we were able to do before a clock ran out.

What do the FPS issues mean for the status of the rest of the project?
Star Citizen’s development is distributed across several different modules or sub-projects, with development happening on all of them simultaneously. By the numbers, only 15% of the team has been working on Star Marine; it’s just been the major focus because it was the next public release. This means that development of other areas, such as Squadron 42, multicrew and the persistent universe, have continued while issues with FPS have stalled development there (though even in that case, development continues in other areas: while network engineers battle back end code, weapons artists and level designers continue to work towards future FPS milestones).

I don’t want to say that there is no impact: integrating the FPS properly will help move every part of Star Citizen forward, as the tech will help form the blood and sinews of the whole game…but I can’t stress enough that two additional months spent on Star Marine are not the same thing as two months of a delay for Star Citizen. The persistent universe team in Austin is still building brilliant new worlds, the ship team in Santa Monica is coming up with great concepts and integrating existing ships in preparation for future Arena Commander updates…and of course the Squadron 42 team in the UK is full speed ahead on the single player adventure. The biggest issue we have faced is that all the recent Arena Commander work, including new flyable ships has been done on the Star Marine branch of the game’s build. We expected to have 1.2 launched and wanted to take advantage of the great new tech Star Marine’s integration provides.

What’s next?
To that end, we are going to investigate releasing a build with Star Marine disabled that would allow you to experience some of the changes and updates we’ve made over the last few months to the core code base. There are some technical challenges in doing this, and it won’t happen overnight…but I feel that it’s incredibly important to do because we need to test with the public, we need to collect your feedback and frankly we need to continue proving that we’re working on what you care about.

When will we see Star Marine? Tonight, I don’t have an absolute answer for you. What I will tell you is that we know exactly what we have to do, and we’re already well on our way to doing it. With allocation of additional resources and increased cross-studio focus on the FPS portion of the game we are on our way… we’re just not there quite yet. I’m confident that with the significant updates and changes to the backend architecture discussed above that we will have an experience worthy of the Star Citizen name; it’s just going to take some additional integration and testing. On the public side, I know that it’s time to open up our communications on the Star Marine rollout process: starting with this message and continuing each week, we will provide a high level update on the challenges just as we did for Arena Commander.

We ended the 2012 pledge campaign with ‘The Pledge,’ in which I outlined our new company’s goals to be open about our process. Today, I want to rededicate ourselves to this: I can’t promise you we’ll meet every internal deadline or that every decision we make is something you’ll agree with. There will be challenges that we struggle to overcome, and we will never be able to predict all of these with certainty…but I can promise you we will keep you informed and that we will not stop working until the game is done right. After all, that’s why we’re here in the first place. Your support is letting us create the game we want to make before anything else. Because of you, we have the freedom to make sure things work the way we want, even if it takes more time and more effort. We won’t let you down!
There’s some exciting crowd funding news to share today: Brian Fargo and inXile are resurrecting The Bard’s Tale, a franchise that has been dormant for almost thirty years! For those old enough to remember gaming in the 1980s, the Bard’s Tale series was one of the first serious contenders for the cRPG throne established by Origin’s Ultima series. The series offered now-classic dungeon crawler gameplay with a number of unique takes, including innovative early 3D graphics and a special emphasis on music in the game world. The new game looks to be a return to form, aiming to revive the sort of single-player, party-based game seemingly forgotten in the age of massively multiplayer worlds.

What I’ve seen of the Bard’s Tale IV thus far looks great. I’m confident that Brian and his team will deliver a worthy sequel for the long-dormant series. But what really interests me (and what inspired me to share this news with the Star Citizen community) is the fact that this is inXile’s third crowd funding campaign. What that means is that they’ve turned what was once a traditional development studio into something that truly harnesses the grass roots power of the crowd. The first of their projects to be finished, Wasteland 2, launched earlier this year. I backed Wasteland 2 and thought it was great… and the reviews seem to agree. It’s a game that stays true to the spirit and gameplay of the original. And beyond that, it’s proof that crowdfunded games from creative industry veterans can deliver better quality than you’d expect from a publisher because they’re motivated to make a great game instead of profit for shareholders.

But more than that, what all of this tells me is that what we’re doing isn’t a fluke: crowd funding really does have the potential to replace the publisher model. It seems so simple: give the players themselves a stake in making the games they want to play. If you’re interested in a high quality dungeon crawler (or have fond memories of the original) I encourage you to check out the Bard’s Tale IV trailer, embedded below. And if you’re interested in pledging (or just seeing how the future of game development will work) you can check out their Kickstarter here.
When we released our last major game update, 1.1, I posted that going forward we would refer to future public builds as ‘Star Citizen’ rather than ‘Arena Commander.’ Star Citizen 1.1 instead of Arena Commander 1.1. The reasoning behind this decision was the fact that in the near future we won’t just be releasing Arena Commander. We’ll be releasing Star Marine, the initial social module, multi-crew, Squadron 42… and more. Star Citizen is coming together, and it made sense to get that across. Since we wanted the external number to match what we use internally, calling it Star Citizen 1.1 just made sense.

The big problem was that calling the game “1.1” is that it could also imply something I didn’t intend. There’s no proper standard for build numbers, but it is a common practice to refer to your first commercial release as 1.0. Calling what we are releasing Star Citizen 1.1 might imply that Star Citizen is finished, or a game you can pick up and play in its polished form today. Many backers argued this point on the forums, and we listened carefully to the debate.

Many of you may see this as a small thing, easily dismissed or corrected. But what truly struck me about the response was the reasoning that came up time and again: of course backers know and understand where Star Citizen is in development today… but they were concerned that new players learning about the project wouldn’t. And that crystallized something for me: Star Citizen’s community doesn’t just want to play the game they’ve paid for… they care as much as the development team about making sure the game is a success. For all the debate back and forth, the thought that our community would worry quite seriously about excluding future players made me extremely happy.

So of course we resolved to make a change. As noted above, one of the requirements was that it not just be a forward facing community change: if we were going to change how we name our builds, we were going to do it internally and externally. Internally, we had much the same discussion that was going on on the forums: what do we call it? Add a leading 0? Temporarily drop ‘Star Citizen’? A new system of letters? In the process, we reviewed all of your many suggestions. In the end, the answer was that we wanted to keep it Star Citizen and we wanted to call it 1.1 in order to avoid renumbering everything and reworking our stream names (more of a challenge than you would think) and our long term plans. You’re playing the same builds we are, it only makes sense to give you the same information we have. And so with a great deal of very careful consideration I’m happy to announce that we have chosen one of the community’s suggestsions: you are downloading Star Citizen Alpha 1.1 with today’s release. Thank you to everyone out there who took part in this debate, and who helped us decide on the best change to make.

Alpha 1.1.1 – Today’s Update (Primarily Arena Commander improvements)
Alpha 1.1.2 – Code Stability bug fix patch for Pre-Star Marine
Alpha 1.2.0 – Star Marine
Alpha 1.3.0 – Social Module
Hopefully, that solves the numbering issue and helps new backers understand Star Citizen’s status and plans. I will close with a final, genuine thank you to the community for helping sort this out and for caring enough about Star Citizen in the first place that it would ever be an issue.
Dateline: Austin, Texas. I am in town helping the persistent universe team prepare for our SXSW presentation on Sunday and to kick off next week’s CIG Networking Summit. We’ll be talking out the details of our backend infrastructure in the cloud and how the various servers and services will interact with the clients. Not as sexy as showing off new spaceships, but absolutely essential to make Star Citizen work! On Sunday, we’re hosting a SXSW closing party which will include a Star Citizen presentation. Anyone in the area is encouraged to attend, see what we’re working on and spend time with the team. It’s a good sneak peak at what we’re going to be putting out after Star Marine drops. For those that can’t make it, we’ll have a video from the presentation up on Sunday and the entire presentation available next week.

Of course, we’re also pushing forward with our public releases of the game itself! As you know, we’ve been working in the week since PAX East to get Star Citizen 1.1 out the door. We sat down to review a build candidate this morning and have decided that it’s not ready for launch today. We’re doing some additional work to make sure that two of our big features are polished: the multiplayer free flight mode and the manual take-off and landing. Both of these are important prototypes for the finished Star Citizen game and both move us away from a simple combat game to a broader universe to explore and interact with.

In the meantime, we have launched a new PTU build of our most current iteration. The PTU process is proving invaluable because it not only gives backers more opportunities to test things, but it also shows you what we’re working on and (on occasion) why it isn’t ready for primetime yet. In this case, expect to enjoy the Retaliator in the Hangar and the Gladius in flight… but you may run into some trouble while trying to use the auto-landing system! Being open with your backers is one of the keys to a successful crowd funding project, and it’s hard to imagine being more open than letting you play our test builds! I’ve also asked that the long-awaited weapons mount design post, which we had been planning to put out for the 1.1 release, be published today. It should be available now on the Comm-Link!

When it goes live next week (barring serious issues!) Star Citizen 1.1 will add the Retaliator, the Gladius, the REC system, multiplayer free flight, improvements to the flight model, manual and automatic landings… and then behind the screens it will premiere things like the 64-bit floating point that will soon allow us to create significantly larger maps. But perhaps the single most important thing about 1.1 is that it’s Star Citizen and not Arena Commander.: With 1.1, we’re doing a lot behind the scenes to set up rapid expansion that you’ll see over the next few months as we add Star Marine and the social module to the Star Citizen experience. You’ll still see plenty of changes and enhancements to Arena Commander, which forms the basis for our spaceflight system, but I now see us building the full game out in many directions.

Looking forward: our next major release is Star Citizen 1.2, which will add Star Marine to the mix. I’m incredibly pleased with the reaction both backers and gamers alike had to the Astro Arena at PAX East, and I’ve asked the team at Illfonic to spend additional time on the polish for this one. With a big focus on cleaning up character animations, I’m hoping to put out something that won’t just meet the expectations of our backers but that will also showcase to other gamers what Star Citizen is capable of! We’ll have more details as we get closer; expect to see our Community team in Denver hosting a remote episode of AtV and introducing you to more of the characters behind this aspect of Star Citizen.

Finally, I’d also like to congratulate all of our backers on $75 million in crowd funding raised. As I’ve said before, I don’t like to focus on money in these letters… but it’s still quite a milestone! You have put an incredible amount of trust in me and the Star Citizen team, and we intend to deliver the game you deserve. In honor of this achievement and the impending launch of 1.1, I’m going to go ahead and start everyone off with 5,000 REC. This should help us kickstart the new system, let our designers observe it in action for the next balance pass… and give you all some cool toys to play with!
In my last letter, I announced that we are moving away from the traditional stretch goals in favor of spending more time diving into how Star Citizen will work. The design post on the basic mechanics of mining in Star Citizen is a great example of this. Mining and the reveal of the Orion are the result of Star Citizen’s unique synergy. The ship you see was visualized by George Hull, a Hollywood artist who has worked on everything from The Matrix to Transformers to Chappie… for a role developed in Austin, Texas by Tony Zurovec and the Persistent Universe team. I’ve often spoken about my desire to blend the techniques developed for filmmaking with the best aspects of traditional game design (something that goes back to my Wing Commander days), and you are seeing the result here. I’m pleased with both the system and the ship, and can’t wait to see both working in Star Citizen.

At CitizenCon, we talked about how we would like to double down on community content in 2015. This is something I believe in because it means better connecting backers to the game you’re making possible. In the last twenty four hours, you’ve seen the reveal of the RSI Orion, our design for mining in the persistent universe, a video round table from concept artists in Austin, an extended discussion of REC with Travis and Calix, a poll and first look at the Star Citizen box art and an Inside CIG on the recent mocap shoot at Imaginarium! Later tonight, we’ll have a new edition of Jump Point for our loyal subscribers. Tonight’s edition focuses on much of the planet side work being done in Austin and Montreal… and next month will be the long-awaited Retaliator issue!


What I would really like to talk about today is what an exciting time this is in Star Citizen’s development. Building our universe is already the most creatively satisfying thing I’ve ever done. But the coming months are going to be something else. Without sharing internal target dates, I will tell you that we are entering into the tightest schedule we’ve ever had for public releases. In short order, you will see Arena Commander 1.1 (now with REC!), the FPS module and the so-called ‘social module,’ our first foray into the persistent universe. We’ve talked a lot about how Star Citizen will come together from disparate pieces over the past year, and we are now entering into when that happens. I can’t express how excited I am. Will there be unforeseen issues, bugs to squash and things to balance? Yes! …but I know that I have an amazing development team AND the best community ever assembled behind me. Stay tuned: it’s going to be big!

I’d also like to take a moment to thank all of the backers who have been helping with Arena Commander’s testing. We have thousands of players brave enough to try PTU releases which has helped the QA team immensely; our public patches are now more stable on release and we are able to focus more effort on balancing. A special credit for those who helped us stress test the servers earlier in the week; we discovered and fixed a bug that we would have otherwise not seen. We’re going to try again this next week, so tune in Monday, February 23rd at 1 PM PST when hopefully you’ll have a better chance of battling members of the dev team!

Backing and playing aren’t the only ways to help determine Star Citizen’s future, though. Your support of the game, your sharing it with others and spreading the word is what’s making this endeavor possible. I’d like to share the latest from years1hundred in this space. You may remember him as the creator of the original Imagine trailer, and his latest work is just as good. We’ve been talking internally about creating a “Career” campaign for Star Citizen when the Persistent Universe launches and we have enough gameplay footage to showcase the various roles you can play as it’s a great way to highlight the promise of Star Citizen’s open universe. Years1hundred (Simon Peña) must have been reading our mind! :) It’s always a great feeling to see proof that backers understand the possibility behind Star Citizen just like the team and I do.

Speaking of fan videos, a number of backers have been disappointed that we no longer highlight them on Around the Verse. To that end, we’ve asked Jared Huckaby, who you may know as Disco Lando, to put together a sort of ‘Talk Soup’ for Star Citizen fan videos. The pilot of Wonderful World of Star Citizen will run next week; it’s an irreverent look at the Star Citizen community FROM the Star Citizen community, and I’m eager to see it evolve the same way as our other productions. The backers who put so much blood, sweat and tears into supporting the game need a platform, and we’re going to build one. Additionally, the upcoming Community Hub at the RSI site will allow us to highlight fan videos, streams, art, ship designs and more… and you’ll be seeing more information on that soon.


Let’s talk events! Everyone on the team who attended last month’s Town Hall has expressed how energized they were from being able to interact with backers. We have plenty of upcoming events, including PAX East and the SXSW Interactive closing party. Meeting members of the community and talking to them about their desires and dreams for Star Citizen keeps us going through the toughest bugs and design challenges. I’m happy to announce here that at PAX East in Boston you will get your first chance to play the First Person Shooter’s zero-gravity Battlesphere mode. We’ll have demo machines up and running at the event, so please consider joining us. You can learn more here.

Finally, I know that everyone is expecting me to talk more about Rental Equipment Credits. I took part in the heated discussion over the weekend and one of our priorities this week was clarifying some of the confusion about the system. I don’t have much to add right now, but I do want to stress: we asked for your feedback because we genuinely wanted it. A sincere thank you to everyone who provided that feedback. I’ll stress: we’re going to create a system that’s fun, not one that hurts players. Like everything else in Star Citizen, we will balance and expand our system to that goal once it launches until it meets our vision, and we will not settle for less.


I will close with the traditional thank you. There’s no million dollar milestone being celebrated, but there doesn’t have to be. The Star Citizen community does things every day that deserve our thanks. From testing the game to supporting the team to rallying for us to succeed (and telling us when we’re wrong!) this game has your DNA through and through. Thank you for making it possible. We have a hard few months ahead of us on the team, but it’s the best work in the world. And after that, we can look forward to a major motion capture shoot at which Squadron 42’s script will finally become a reality! You in the community will be the first to share in all of this.


2014 has been a huge year for Star Citizen.

THEN: the Hangar Module in 2013
THEN: the Hangar Module in 2013
NOW: Arena Commander 1.0 in action; screenshot by PiteCZek
NOW: Arena Commander 1.0 in action; screenshot by PiteCZek
NEXT: The FPS Mode's Battle Arena
NEXT: The FPS Mode's Battle Arena
We launched Arena Commander v0.8 in June and since then we’ve shown the ambition of the First Person Universe we are building with a prototype of multi crew ship combat, the scale and detail of the planet side environments and demonstrated the visceral action of the First Person Combat that players will experience in Star Citizen.

We’ve delivered 23 updates to Star Citizen / Arena Commander, four of them being major feature updates (v0.8. v0.9, v0.9.2) with the last one being the largest, Arena Commander v1.0, with fifteen new ships for backers to fly (all the Aurora and Hornet variants, Mustang family, Base Avenger and Cutlass Black) as well as significant gameplay additions like the signature system and social features like the first version of the lobby system allowing you to join up with your friends.

Star Citizen’s backers downloaded 13.7 PETABYTES of data from Star Citizen’s CDN during 2014 up from just ONE Petabyte in 2013. The community logged over two million sessions and one million hours playing Arena Commander which has been split approximately 80% single player and 20% multiplayer

Cloud Imperium’s staff – which is solely dedicated to making Star Citizen – has grown from 70 employees last Christmas to 180 today, spread around four internal locations; Santa Monica, Austin, Manchester, UK and a nascent office in Germany that we will be sharing details about in the coming year.

We have an additional 120 developers working on the game spread between our partners at Behaviour, Illfonic, Turbulent, outsource companies and individual contractors.

The number of Star Citizens doubled in 2014, which helped the project to raise $33M in additional funding, bringing the total raised since October 10th 2012 to just over $68.5M.

All of this allows us to build Star Citizen to a level of ambition that no publisher would dare to reach for on a PC… let alone a Space Sim!

When looking back at how far Star Citizen and its community has come in just two short years I am always amazed. What is the secret of the project’s support?

People that just read headlines wonder why; why have we raised so much money, why do people still contribute money to Star Citizen, why are people so excited?

Like many things Star Citizen isn’t easy to understand with a cursory glance. Star Citizen doesn’t easily fit in a familiar box like most games you’ll buy from a major publisher.

It’s something I’ve been reflecting on, especially as I have a couple of talks coming up with BAFTA in Los Angeles and at DICE in Las Vegas. What makes Star Citizen defy so many conventions? What continues to propel Star Citizen every month despite the game still being in development?

Numbers are always easy to focus and make nice headlines but they don’t tell the real story of why Star Citizen has gotten to where it is.

Star Citizen would be nothing without its real trump card –

The most engaged community in gaming!

It’s easy to say Star Citizen is a community focused game but it’s so much more than that. Very early in the project I made a decision to go beyond the traditional alpha model and share functionality of the game as we built it, updating and involving the community every step of the way. It is one thing to share updates but it’s a whole other level of engagement to share incremental builds with subsets of functionality of the final game to get hands on feedback.

We actively solicit and listen to feedback on the numerous patches (which we deliver on average twice a month). We have multiple video shows each week discussing the game, giving behind the scenes glimpses and highlighting community contributions. We give more detailed monthly updates to our backers on the game’s progress than I ever gave any publisher I was making a game for!

Anyone that first installed the Hangar module back in August 2013, then played Arena Commander v0.8 in June and has now has Arena Commander v1.0 on their drive can attest to the progress that has been made, how feedback from the community affects the updates and how things slowly but steadily get better and more polished.

Are we done? No! We have a long way to go! No one at CIG is resting on their laurels but it it’s this PARTNERSHIP with all of YOU, the community that is enabling a game of this ambition to be made. You are a community that contributes something much more valuable than funding for development. You contribute your time, your feedback, your ideas and your passion.

And THIS is the secret of Star Citizen.

It’s a project that is being built not just by 300 developers, but a project that is being built by hundreds of thousands of gamers that love PC games, that love space games and want to see a game made RIGHT, one that has such depth and ambition that they can see themselves happily adventuring for years to come.

This is a model I and the rest of the team at CIG have happily embraced. I have never had so much fun building a game and if you asked any Star Citizen developer they will probably agree with me. We love the process of creating this game lock step with all of you out there. We are continually amazed by the creativity and enthusiasm of the community. How within hours of a patch going up we can watch streams of people playing. The team is constantly passing around fan videos where we see something surprising; whether it’s a bit of skill, an exploit we didn’t see or just a piece that sums up Star Citizen better than we could. The original “Imagine” trailer by Kieran (years1hundred on YouTube) was a great example, but there’s other amazing stuff out there; DeVall’s “Hype Citizen” trailer, Corporation Incorporated / Fiendish Feather’s videos of Scavenging on a wrecked Constellation, a Search and Rescue mission or just showcasing the Mustang Variants is just a small sampling of what our community is capable of.

So when I read a press article that questions whether we can deliver all the promised features to keep everyone happy, or I see someone that can’t fathom how Star Citizen can have such support and without doing any research jump to cynical conclusions I just smile.

Because with the community we have and the passionate and talented team of developers I can’t imagine us “flopping” as a few bloggers have predicted. Not because we’re better than everyone else, but because building a game this way, in total lock step with your community, means it’s pretty hard to fail in the long run. Will we build everybody’s dream game? Of course not, that would be impossible! But with this level of engagement and iteration I think we’ll build something special that people can happily lose themselves in even if it doesn’t have every feature they dreamed of.

And it won’t stop there.

The number one priority for team in building the Persistent Universe is how players themselves can affect the universe. We’re building a game that will be just as community driven once the game is “finished”. It’s why we’ve built organization support into the web site, why we’re expanding it this coming year with private forums and blogs and starting to layer in the organization support in the game itself.

Star Citizen isn’t a sprint, it isn’t even a marathon. There is no final finish line the way you would have with a traditional retail game. Star Citizen is a way of life for as long as the community is engaged by it.

My 100% focus, and the rest of the team is to make sure all of you are continually engaged. Not just by the “finished” game (if you can ever call anything in Star Citizen finished) but by the development process, the early builds of the game, by the discussion and feedback loop.

And this is what I tell my friends in the industry that have no idea how we’ve managed to do what we do. You have to throw away the old approaches to how you develop, how you share and how you engage your community.

Or in Silas Koerner’s words, “Dare to challenge the expectation of what has come before. To embrace the unique. To put everything on the line. Only when you risk everything can we discover something truly special”

EVERYONE, both the development team and all of you are dedicated to making Star Citizen something special. If we don’t get a feature perfect the first time we will continue to refine and improve.

And that is what will make Star Citizen different than most other publisher backed games. We have the willpower and patience. Our stakeholders just have one goal in mind…

Make the Best Damn Space Sim Ever!

So here’s a big THANK YOU for everyone’s support, patience and enthusiasm in 2014 and here’s to looking forward to continuing to make history together in 2015.

This coming year will be an even bigger year than 2014 – the FPS module will go live to backers, we will be giving our first drops of the Persistent universe, starting with the Planetside social module, the multi-crew Arena Commander and the first Episode of Squadron 42.

2015 is where the game will be shaped. And it will be shaped with your input. So get in the game and let us know what works and what doesn’t for you!

It’s going to be a lot of work, but also a lot of fun and I couldn’t imagine doing it with a better group of people than group of developers working on the game and the amazing Star Citizen community.
Its been a busy week for the Star Citizen team! A good portion of the project leads have gathered in Manchester, England where we have been focusing on all issues related to characters, animation, cinematics and Squadron 42. The goal of this summit has been to sync up the rest of studios with the incredibly talented team at Foundry 42 for the major push to release the first chapter of Squadron 42 towards the back half of next year. It has been a fantastic week, full of passionate debate and pure creativity that I’m proud to say drives this project… but while we’ve been heads down making sure Squadron 42 lives up to the larger vision for Star Citizen, it seems a stretch goal or two may have passed! :)

Between the final days of the anniversary sale and the roll-out of the Anvil Carrack explorer platform, we’ve managed to surpass $66 million in crowd funding! It’s an astonishing number that both old backers and new made possible: while many existing backers pledged for Carracks, we also had over 7,400 new backers who decided to find out what all the fuss was about. Thank you to all and welcome to our new players; we’re happy to have you onboard on this adventure!

At $64 million, pets are a ‘go!’

Pets – We have repair bots, we have fish… but we haven’t implemented a pet system in Star Citizen yet. At $64 million, that changes. From Jones the Cat in Alien to the Battlestar Galactica’s Daggit, pets have a place onboard starships… and we want to give you that option in Star Citizen. Expect traditional terrestrial options, plus anything exotic we can dream up in the Star Citizen universe! (Those Torshu Grey crabs that keep escaping are just the start.) This stretch goal is in honor of Paddington, Strike Dog of the UEES Paul Steed. In one of our first videos Paddington helped us get to $4 million back in the initial campaign, and sadly passed away recently.
The last letter hinted at the $65 million stretch goal: a revamp of our modular ship design drawn directly from player feedback. As Star Citizen stands today, the ships are extremely customizable. You can switch engines, thrusters, guns, missiles, turrets, sensor suites, scanners, cargo pods and some interior ‘seats’ (and much more.) Starting with 1.0, we’ve added the first iteration of the technology for a paint system that will allow us to create promised skins and ultimately let you alter your ship’s exterior appearance. For 1.0 it is used to handle the various paintjobs for the variants. But longer term this will allow us to give everyone the skins they have backed for and ultimately this system will allow for some user generated paintjobs!

Caterpillar modular tech concept
Caterpillar modular tech concept
One huge piece of feedback from the Constellation and Cutlass sales has been that backers want more: they want to customize the roles and the internals of their ships to a higher degree than we initially envisioned. Based on this feedback we intend to make changes to the ships that make sense to better represent what you want. The team at Foundry 42 is already building a number of modular capital ships, like the Javelin, that can change their internal and external form factors through an array of optional user-configured modules. What we intend now to do is take the technology and design work done for these capital ships and apply it back to a number of Star Citizen’s smaller personal craft.

Enhanced Ship Modularity – So you have the ship of your dreams, but really wish that it could be customized to suit your needs a bit more than the off-the-shelf models? This new goal, a massive undertaking, is going to be of interest. We are looking to overhaul any suitable ships (including the Cutlass, Avenger, Retaliator and Redeemer) to allow many modular components to be available as swap-outs. For example: if you have purchased a Redeemer, then using the new system you would have a variety of new modules available to refit the ship, internal and external, to suit your play requirements. If you wanted to make it a Bounty Hunter ship, you could buy a “Stasis Chamber module” for the lower deck and you would be able to capture and store fugitives to be delivered for their bounties at your leisure. You could configure the upper deck to be outfitted with a “long range communication suite” allowing you to keep in touch with your “Infoagent” even when in deep space. Fed up of Bounty hunting? Swap in a larger cargo module in the lower deck to make that profitable run you have been planning for a while, or add the Explorer Module with deployable vehicle for some planetside recon. Manufacturers will still be offering pre-configured variants, but should you be looking to adapt a hull to suit a certain task then your ship has come in (and is now ready for modification!)
Of course, $65 million isn’t the only milestone we need to discuss in this letter. Starting with $66 million, I want to start focusing everyone on the level of detail and immersion that everyone’s support is enabling. So instead of always having a feature or a reward I want to share a deeper view into an element of the design that has been enabled by your continuing support.

This time around, we’re going to tell you about Star Citizen’s multi-crew ship seat actions. With the release of the Carrack, there has been a lot of discussion about how ships can be flown solo, whether or not they need a crew… and there have been a lot of questions as to how any of that will even work. You can read on below to find out the answers to those questions and more. (This letter’s design update was put together with the team here in the UK, who are also currently looking forward to the multi-crew ship features for Arena Commander 2.0)

This doesn’t mean we won’t still occasionally reward backers with in-game content (flair, UEC, ship upgrades and more types to come!) or propose new ship types to celebrate major milestones but I would like the focus to be more about the amazing game that you are all enabling rather than the amounts we have raised. The real story is that with a community and the team sharing such a passion for making something special, with all of your continued support we have an opportunity to make history.

As always, thank you for making all of this possible. It’s an honor to be at the head of development of a game that already means so much to such an excellent group of backers. You’ve earned your Citizenship! Finally: please sound off in the comments section: does this new system work for you? We WILL be listening!
Congratulations on helping us get to $63 million in crowd funding! Many backers have picked up limited or wave two ships during the anniversary sale, and I’m truly grateful. We’ve always stressed that you don’t need anything beyond a basic starter ship to be able to earn anything or go anywhere in the Star Citizen universe, but we acknowledge that the support the community gives by investing in bigger or additional ships allows Star Citizen to deliver a deeper, richer experience much sooner than we could otherwise. In addition your continued support is allowing us to make some smart investments in the world wide team and technology that will safeguard the future of the game.

I’ve had a number of backers ask me why I don’t ‘stock pile’ letters and have them ready to go immediately… especially during an event like this. My answer is that I don’t feel right assuming things like that when it comes to backers providing the project with millions of dollars! The letters may take a few extra days now, but they’re always from the heart.

The $62 million stretch goal was the penultimate ‘wave four’ ship design:
Genesis-class Starliner – The Genesis is yet another landmark in Crusader Industries’ proud history of transport designs. This ship utilizes award-winning manufacturing techniques and the highest quality parts to create one thing; a next-generation passenger ship at a price that won’t break your budget. Crusader Industries’ proprietary NeoG engine technology offers some of the most efficient flight for a ship of its size. The Genesis line has been cited in Whitley’s as “one of the most reliable and safe public transport ships on the market.” Genesis Starliners are available in a number of stock configurations, focusing on everything from passenger capacity to freight to overall comfort. The UEE military operates multiple Genesis conversions for support roles, including SWACS and starflight test operations.

I love options like this, because they’re more than just fighting ships. They help us populate a living breathing universe… after all, most people are more likely to encounter 737s than F-22s in their daily lives! For the next goal, a whopping 50% of the vote went to the MISC Reliant to be the third starter ship:
MISC Reliant – With the success of the Freelancer “Built for Life” campaign, MISC has moved to join RSI and Consolidated in the single-seat introductory starship arena. Their silver bullet? A starter ship with more than one seat… and their ace in the hole: Xi’An technology. Where the Aurora is a pure utilitarian platform and the Mustang is a delicate, maneuverable personal transport, the Reliant is MISC’s most Xi’An tech-heavy ship to date. Featuring impossibly sleek lines, two separate crew seats and a vertical fuselage design, the Reliant’s streamlined cockpits glow with some of the finest xenotechnology available!

And since we’ve already hit $63 million, the Reliant is in the bag! It sounds like backers are interested in seeing more alien technology! That’s one thing Star Citizen will deliver on. As I said last time, never say never for the other concepts… I especially liked the Drake ‘space motorcycle.’

We’ve added a lot of ships lately, and so we’re making the $64 million goal a fun one. 
Pets – We have repair bots, we have fish… but we haven’t implemented a traditional pet system in Star Citizen yet. At $64 million, that changes. From Jones the Cat in Alien to the Battlestar Galactica’s Daggit, pets have a place onboard starships… and we want to give you that option in Star Citizen. Expect traditional terrestrial options, plus anything exotic we can dream up in the Star Citizen universe! (Those Torshu Grey crabs that keep escaping are just the start.) This stretch goal is in honor of Paddington, Strike Dog of the UEES Paul Steed. In one of our first videos Paddington helped us get to $4 million back in the initial campaign, and sadly passed away recently.

For those looking ahead to $65 million, we have a major feature we’re investigating as an option. Suffice it to say, we’ve heard a lot of your feedback about modular ships and we want to expand our plan for how to do them… so check back next letter for more information!

I can’t say it enough: thank you. I often finding myself sitting down to play Arena Commander and just admiring what we’ve made together. Sure, we could have done this behind closed doors… but it wouldn’t have had the same heart and soul, and it wouldn’t be coming together in the same way. Arena Commander is a microcosm of Star Citizen: your backing made it possible, your feedback is making it work the way we imagined together… and your belief in what we’re doing here (and patience with real software development!) is going to push us to continuously iterate and improve. As we deliver more aspects of Star Citizen, from first person combat, to planetside exploration to a gripping single player narrative story to planets and star systems you can fly between, I think it will dawn on all of us just how groundbreaking and unprecedented the journey that we are all taking together is. Nothing of this scope has ever been attempted, and never in this fashion.

See you in the ‘Verse!
It’s good to be home! After a fourteen hour flight home from Australia, it was a nice surprise to see that Star Citizen’s backers had once again hit another milestone. It’s hard to express here how deeply everyone at CIG appreciate what the community has done, and is doing… We all thank you!

The $61 million stretch goal unlocks the Esperia Prowler, a Tevarin-designed UEE ship. I’m excited to see where our concept artists take this one, as they’re going to have to design a new style for another alien race and then adopt it for human use. It should be an interesting process. Here’s the description:

Esperia Prowler – Named after the UPE military designation, the Prowler is a modernized version of the infamous Tevarin boarding craft from the First Tevarin War. With the recent discovery of the lost Tevarin planet in Kabal System, Esperia’s engineers were given unmitigated access to examine the preserved ships found in several of the caches, before meticulously recreating the design choices. The Prowler’s effectiveness as a rapid personnel deployment vehicle was mainly due to its silence. The boarding was constructed using a variety of techniques to minimize its signatures and get close to unsuspecting vessels before quickly deploying their boarders via EVA. With the updated Prowler model, you will find the perfect fusion of two culture: the elegance and effectiveness of the Tevarin war machine combined with the reliability of modern UEE technology. (While lacking some of the upgrades of the modern version, vintage Tevarin-built Prowlers restored for modern spaceflight are prized by owners lucky enough to locate them.)
The winner of the ultimate wave four ship poll was the third starter. When we say a ‘starter’ ship in Star Citizen, it doesn’t mean one you ditch as soon as you can… it just means a smaller, less expensive ship that will introduce you to the Star Citizen world. We had similar starter ships in Privateer and Freelancer, and plenty of players opted to stick with their old reliable hulls for the whole game! Star Citizen’s starter ships tend to be more ‘jack of all trades,’ allowing you to sample different activities in the ‘verse.

When we sat down to choose the ideal third starter we went in knowing that it needed to stand out the same way the Mustang differed from the Aurora without being dedicated to a specific role. What we couldn’t decide on was who was going to make this new ship. We already had starters from RSI and Consolidated… so who gets the next one? A pirate-oriented starter from Drake, a military one from Anvil or Aegis, or perhaps a small luxury craft from Origin or a commercial one from MISC?

In the end, we put together outlines for four possible ships, one from each ship builder (representatives from the fifth company, Origin, turned down our request; apparently, they just won’t build an inexpensive ship!) And now we’re giving backers the ability to choose which one we develop into Star Citizen’s third starter. Here are the options:

Drake Dragonfly: You don’t so much as climb into the Dragonfly as you do put it on around you. In short, it’s the closest thing to strapping an engine and a weapons mount to your spacesuit… or, as the advertising campaign claims, it’s the closest thing to riding the vacuum yourself. Occupying somewhere in the pantheon between a snub fighter and an Aurora, the Dragonfly is a speedy, maneuverable ultralight designed to be cheaply constructed in large numbers and to be readily customized by hobbyists. Dragonfly’s have become the favorite of a particular brand of enthusiast that frequently gather together to share their modifications, off-track race… and other less legitimate “hobbies.”
Aegis Terrapin: A literal tough nut to crack, the Terrapin is the most heavily armored of the base-priced spacecraft on the market. Originally designed for long-range survey missions in dangerous star systems, the Terrapin’s design philosophy involves wrapping the ship in additional layers of armor and reserving a significant amount of engine power to host the largest shield generator in its class. Terrapins are popular among private miners, with an equipment mount and a small storage hold that can be converted for valuable minerals.
Anvil Hurricane: Some ships avoid dangerous encounters with speed, some with stealth and others with maneuverability. The Anvil Hurricane’s philosophy is that it should be able to blast anything that gets in its way out of the sky. The Hurricane won’t win any races and its electronic signature won’t let you sneak behind enemy lines… but it features a wide array of fully customizable small bore weapons hardpoints plus the ability to customize weapons types in several ways. Hurricanes are often used by militia squadrons and private organizations seeking to add a “heavy” to their lineup.
MISC Reliant: With the success of the Freelancer “Built for Life” campaign, MISC has moved to join RSI and Consolidated in the single-seat introductory starship arena. Their silver bullet? A starter ship with more than one seat… and their ace in the hole: Xi’An technology. Where the Aurora is a pure utilitarian platform and the Mustang is a delicate, maneuverable personal transport, the Reliant is MISC’s most Xi’An tech-heavy ship to date. Featuring impossibly sleek lines, two separate crew seats and a vertical fuselage design, the Reliant’s streamlined cockpits glow with some of the finest xenotechnology available!
Please let us know what your favorite is in the poll below; the winner will be Star Citizen’s third starter… and the others will go back in the vault for future reference (I can already see backers writing in to ask if we might ever see the runner ups again; we don’t have space on the schedule for multiple new starters at the moment, but never say never!) I think that any of these four ships would make a great addition to Star Citizen’s lineup, and so I’m confident in letting backers make the choice!

I’ll announce the winner in my next letter. Until then, I’d like to thank you again for your continued support. Our backers are the most incredible group of people in the world, and every time I see how creative you are in supporting the game and spreading the word, I’m all the just more grateful that this has all come together. Thank you.
In the past three weeks, we’ve seen the reaction to the MMO demo, the FPS demo and the Arena Commander 0.9.2 patch… and to say we’re thrilled is an understatement. The team is ecstatic that their efforts are being appreciated, and I think I speak for everyone on the team when we say it really feels like Star Citizen is starting to go from a series of modules to a single, coherent vision.


Over the weekend, following the FPS reveal, we hit $60 million in crowd funding. That’s an incredible number, and I’m very happy to report that we have everything from old backers picking up Heralds and Redeemers to new backers impressed with our early presentation of first person shooter mechanics joining up to make Star Citizen happen!

Before we move on to stretch goals, I’d like to share some additional images of the Drake Herald that have just came in from our concept artist, Jim Martin. The first shows the internals, modeled out as a 3D concept. The others show a different configuration for the data transmitters that I think better gets across its capabilities. Let me know which you prefer in the comments. A strange looking ship in any event, the Herald is going to introduce some very interesting data-running gameplay elements to Star Citizen’s persistent universe.

At $60 million, you unlocked the previously-voted deep space fighter:

Aegis Bulldog-class Twin-Engine Deep Space Fighter – Strike hard from a distance! The Bulldog, a recent design from Aegis, has quickly become Earth’s premier deep space fighter. Deep space fighters are typically used to pursue engagements in outlying areas when support from a carrier is not available. Bulldogs are usually flown by ground- and station-based naval forces, and are widely used by militia squadrons. Specifically designed to operate from planetary bases and engage targets up to a star system’s distance, the fighter trades some maneuverability for an extended supply of fuel and munitions as well as basic survival accommodations for a pilot and radar operator. The Bulldog’s RIO operates a turret, the ship’s missile loadout (optionally) and its highly advanced sensor suite. This distinct scanning array gives the ‘Dog a particular advantage when fighting in and around an obstacle such as an asteroid field or nebula! Finally, the Bulldog is known to be an extraordinarily sturdy spacecraft, with multiple backup systems not commonly found in single-seat ships; stories of Bulldogs limping back to base with a single engine and half their fuselage exposed to vacuum have become common as the battle against the Vanduul has heated up.
I know that there has been some drama about the winner of the last ship poll, with the results shifting just after the stretch goal was reached. I saw an excellent suggestion on the forums, which was to allow both ships as stretch goals and then to bring back all of the ‘eliminated’ options for one final poll for a veritable wave four ship Ragnarok. We’re going to work an extra ship into the long-term schedule and do just that. (And for the record, in the future: we record the winner as the selection that had the most vote when we reach the stretch goal… in this case, it would be the boarding craft.) At $61 million, you’ll unlock the boarding ship…

Esperia Prowler – Named after the UPE military designation, the Prowler is a modernized version of the infamous Tevarin boarding craft from the First Tevarin War. With the recent discovery of the lost Tevarin planet in Kabal System, Esperia’s engineers were given unmitigated access to examine the preserved ships found in several of the caches, before meticulously recreating the design choices. The Prowler’s effectiveness as a rapid personnel deployment vehicle was mainly due to its silence. The boarding was constructed using a variety of techniques to minimize its signatures and get close to unsuspecting vessels before quickly deploying their boarders via EVA. With the updated Prowler model, you will find the perfect fusion of two culture: the elegance and effectiveness of the Tevarin war machine combined with the reliability of modern UEE technology. (While lacking some of the upgrades of the modern version, vintage Tevarin-built Prowlers restored for modern spaceflight are prized by owners lucky enough to locate them.)
And at $62 million, the passenger liner!

Genesis-class Starliner – The Genesis is yet another landmark in Crusader Industries’ proud history of transport designs. This ship utilizes award-winning manufacturing techniques and the highest quality parts to create one thing; a next-generation passenger ship at a price that won’t break your budget. Crusader Industries’ proprietary NeoG engine technology offers some of the most efficient flight for a ship of its size. The Genesis line has been cited in Whitley’s as “one of the most reliable and safe public transport ships on the market.” Genesis Starliners are available in a number of stock configurations, focusing on everything from passenger capacity to freight to overall comfort. The UEE military operates multiple Genesis conversions for support roles, including SWACS and starflight test operations.
You’ll notice that both of these ships are from “new” manufacturers; that’s because the Star Citizen universe is expanding! My feeling was that specialized ships, like Star Citizen’s equivalent of an airliner, should have some additional backstory to make sense in our world. So, enjoy two new ships AND two niche companies to build them.

Next: As I promised above, we’ve returned all of the eliminated options for the final poll, and you can cast your vote below. There’s more than one here that I’d like to see… it’s going to be a contest!

As always, thank you for your support. You are what’s making Star Citizen happen. I know it seems like we’ve shown a lot in the past few weeks, but I can promise you right here that there’s more to come! We won’t end 2014 without a few more surprises.
We’ve hit another stretch goal! We haven’t had a special ship sale or a big game reveal since CitizenCon, so I can’t credit this most recent accomplishment to a particular trend… but I am very happy to report that there has been a steady flow of new Citizens joining our ranks and helping make the BDSSE possible. If you’re just joining us: welcome! You’re helping us do great things.

The team is hard at work prepping for the PAX Australia demo, and we’re all looking forward to giving an audience of Star Citizen’s backers their first look at something extremely cool this weekend. I think you’re going to be surprised: the FPS module isn’t an aside… it’s a fully featured game in and of itself!

At $59 million, you unlocked the most recent of the backer-voted “wave 4” ship designs, the Anvil Crucible. I’m eager to see this one on the schedule; this repair and construction system isn’t just a new ship, it’s a way to better build out Star Citizen’s world.

Anvil Aerospace Crucible – A so-called “flying toolbox,” the Crucible is the ship you want on your side when you suffer an asteroid collision or survive a pirate attack! Structurally, the Crucible consists of a cockpit, drive unit and workshop. The Crucible’s workshop is versatile: it can be used as a base for conducting EVA repairs (complete with requisite tool storage) or it can use magnetic grapplers to attach directly to a ship hull. In this situation, the workshop actually opens to space and allows a repair crew direct access to a damaged ship. The workshop can either maintain artificial gravity or allow for zero-g repair operations, depending on the needs of the mission. The Crucible’s cockpit is also outfitted with an array of repair tools, including dual purpose mounts that can exchange weapons for tractor beams and remote manipulator arms. The Crucible is also part of a larger planned repair system. For larger projects, independent sections of support struts and drive units, called the Miller ERS (External Repair Structure), can be locked together to form a sort of scaffolding around a damaged starship, the next best thing to an orbital drydock. A standard ERS unit includes a small drive, thrusters, magnetic attach points and modular hardpoints for mounting tractor beams, repair tools or weapons. ERS segments each have a code defining their shape (P1 = Straight section, P2= Left turn, P3 = Right turn, etc.) with the multiple layouts allowing extensive zero-gravity construction as necessary. In the case of damaged capital ships, like the Navy’s Bengal carriers, hundreds of ERS units might be formed into a latticework serviced by a dozen or more Crucibles.
At $59 million, you voted for the Twin-Engine Deep Space Fighter, the first pure fighting ship we’ve seen added to the lineup in quite a while. The deep space fighter was inspired by the twin-engine aircraft of World War II, like the de Havilland Mosquito and the Messerschmitt 110. While there’s no “night” in space, there are reasons for wanting a ranged fighter… and the ability to fight in all-weather conditions take on an entirely new meaning in an environment with meteor storms and sensor-dampening nebulae! Here’s the new ship:

Aegis Bulldog-class Twin-Engine Deep Space Fighter – Strike hard from a distance! The Bulldog, a recent design from Aegis, has quickly become Earth’s premier deep space fighter. Deep space fighters are typically used to pursue engagements in outlying areas when support from a carrier is not available. Bulldogs are usually flown by ground- and station-based naval forces, and are widely used by militia squadrons. Specifically designed to operate from planetary bases and engage targets up to a star system’s distance, the fighter trades some maneuverability for an extended supply of fuel and munitions as well as basic survival accommodations for a pilot and radar operator. The Bulldog’s RIO operates a turret, the ship’s missile loadout (optionally) and its highly advanced sensor suite. This distinct scanning array gives the ‘Dog a particular advantage when fighting in and around an obstacle such as an asteroid field or nebula! Finally, the Bulldog is known to be an extraordinarily sturdy spacecraft, with multiple backup systems not commonly found in single-seat ships; stories of Bulldogs limping back to base with a single engine and half their fuselage exposed to vacuum have become common as the battle against the Vanduul has heated up.
Please vote in the poll below for the next ship in the lineup; the runner ups were extremely close this time around, so I’m eager to see where things land. Be sure to tune in for the livestream on Friday to meet the team behind Star Citizen’s FPS mechanics… and to see what they’ve been working on the past few months.

Until then, thank you for your continued support. I can’t repeat this enough times: none of this would be possible without backers like you. Thank you. I’ll see you down under!
THANK YOU. Over the weekend, we hit both the $57 and the $58 million crowd funding marks, an incredible achievement in itself and one that means we can continue to support and expand Star Citizen. I’m grateful for a lot more than just your backing Star Citizen. Getting to spend Friday at CitizenCon with backers was an amazing experience, and one that confirms that what we are doing here is special in more way than one. It’s hard work to set up these events… but more than worth it for the chance to talk face to face with people that are just as excited about the game and universe as we are on the Star Citizen team. I hope you enjoyed hearing from the various studios and getting your first look at the detail we intend to infuse the persistent universe with. As I said in the presentation: we’re just getting started!

Eagle-eyed backers have noticed a shot of the Gladius in the Hangar during our presentation on Friday. That shot is actually part of a short video put together by Foundry 42 to keep the rest of the team updated on the status of their ships, which include the Avenger, Gladius, Gladiator and Retaliator. In honor of hitting two stretch goals in one weekends, I’d like to share that video with the world. The military ships aren’t quite done yet (there’s still animations, damage stats, sound effects, internal details and the like) but I think they’re looking great. See what you think!

We’ve also just put online a stereoscopic 3D version of the Cutlass commercial. It’s our first 3D commercial, and I think it’s pretty cool. You can check it out for yourself here.


At $57 we hit the first of the Wave Four ship unlocks, the recently-elected Endeavor-class Research Platform! Here’s the initial design description:

MISC Endeavor-class Research Platform – The MISC Endeavor is the company’s most prestigious ship: a dedicated research platform capable of carrying a dozen different space science packages, running the gamut from advanced long-range scanners for jump point identification to additional shielding for near-stellar corona research. Externally, the Endeavor is dotted with sensor hardpoints; internally, the main compartment is centered on a large research laboratory which can be configured for use by a wide range of scientific disciplines. The Endeavor’s main compartment is modular, allowing an alternate configuration as a Hope-class floating hospital. This variant is employed by the UEE and other organizations as battlefield support, capable of getting Marines and pilots back to the battle as quickly as possible! When outfitted as a hospital, the Endeavor’s docking bay is capable of maintaining a single Cutlass Red ambulance. The Endeavor has also found its way into the service of less reputable organizations, where it can has been modified for everything from narcotics production to black market surgery.
Since we reached two stretch goals so quickly, we did not have time for an additional ship poll. Instead of picking the two highest from the previous poll, I’m going to go ahead and announce the last winner as the $59 million stretch goal ship and start the poll for $60 million with the remaining options. I’m a fan of seeing the community debate these things, and as the pool of options decreases it’s great to see backers “campaigning” for their favorite option. Have at it!

We aren’t forgetting $58 million, though. In honor of the goal, we’re giving 10,000 UEC to every backer that you can use for upgrades and flair in the Voyager Direct Store. I’d advise you hold on to the creds: we’re going to have some cool configurable weapons and other upgrades for Arena Commander in the near future! 10,000 UEC may not seem like a lot, but at this stage in the game it actually means we’re giving our backers several million dollars to outfit their ships!

Here’s the next ship winner, which you decided would be the repair platform:

Anvil Aerospace Crucible – A so-called “flying toolbox,” the Crucible is the ship you want on your side when you suffer an asteroid collision or survive a pirate attack! Structurally, the Crucible consists of a cockpit, drive unit and workshop. The Crucible’s workshop is versatile: it can be used as a base for conducting EVA repairs (complete with requisite tool storage) or it can use magnetic grapplers to attach directly to a ship hull. In this situation, the workshop actually opens to space and allows a repair crew direct access to a damaged ship. The workshop can either maintain artificial gravity or allow for zero-g repair operations, depending on the needs of the mission. The Crucible’s cockpit is also outfitted with an array of repair tools, including dual purpose mounts that can exchange weapons for tractor beams and remote manipulator arms. The Crucible is also part of a larger planned repair system. For larger project, independent sections of support struts and drive units, called the Miller ERS (External Repair Structure), can be locked together to form a sort of scaffolding around a damaged starship, the next best thing to an orbital drydock. A standard ERS unit includes a small drive, thrusters, magnetic attach points and modular hardpoints for mounting tractor beams, repair tools or weapons. ERS segments each have a code defining their shape (P1 = Straight section, P2= Left turn, P3 = Right turn, etc.) with the multiple layouts allowing extensive zero-gravity construction as necessary. In the case of damaged capital ships, like the Navy’s Bengal carriers, hundreds of ERS units might be formed into a latticework serviced by a dozen or more Crucibles.
The Crucible should be another great beyond-combat ship that will help expand the roles available in Star Citizen’s persistent universe. Now, go vote for the next one… and convince everyone else on the forums that they should, too!

Again, thank you for the support. Thanks to the incredible response you gave us at CitizenCon, the entire team is charged up and ready to show you what else we can do. It’s going to be good!
We’re going to have a lot of salvage crews roaming the ‘verse! I’m especially happy that the Reclaimer has captured your imaginations; Star Citizen is lot more than just dogfighting, and the fact that so many backers have added Reclaimers to their fleet confirms my feeling that a working universe is much more interesting than just a battlefield. We will continue to focus on adding interesting gameplay mechanics that encourages co-operative play, allowing players to pursue many diverse roles.

Let me take this opportunity to invite everyone to CitizenCon! We will be livestreaming the anniversary presentation on Friday at 7 PM PDT. CitizenCon will be a celebration of how far we’ve come… and a chance to show you where we’re going. Expect to hear updates from each of the project’s studios with a few surprises included. If you can’t make the event live, everything will be available in the Comm-Link shortly afterwards.

At $56 million, you unlocked a user-voted upgrade for Arena Commander! Every backer will be awarded the J-Span Cryo-Star united detailed below, which will become active in a future patch:

J-Span Cryo-Star: Award-winning designers at J-Span have produced one of the most advanced cooling systems yet. The Cryo-Star utilizes a new kind of liquid cooling technology guaranteed to keep your engines cool without sacrificing power. This Arena Commander upgrade will be given to all players who pledged before we reached the 56M goal.
Last week, I asked you to select the role for our first ‘fourth wave’ Star Citizen ship. The results of the poll also confirmed my belief that the community understands the broader reach of Star Citizen: an overwhelming number of backers voted for the research and hospital ship! You can find the first details below:

MISC Endeavor-class Research Platform: The MISC Endeavor is the company’s most prestigious ship: a dedicated research platform capable of carrying a dozen different space science packages, running the gamut from advanced long-range scanners for jump point identification to additional shielding for near-stellar corona research. Externally, the Endeavor is dotted with sensor hardpoints; internally, the main compartment is centered on a large research laboratory which can be configured for use by a wide range of scientific disciplines. The Endeavor’s main compartment is modular, allowing an alternate configuration as a Hope-class floating hospital. This variant is employed by the UEE and other organizations as battlefield support, capable of getting Marines and pilots back to the battle as quickly as possible! When outfitted as a hospital, the Endeavor’s docking bay is capable of maintaining a single Cutlass Red ambulance. The Endeavor has also found its way into the service of less reputable organizations, where it can has been modified for everything from narcotics production to black market surgery.
Whew; this should be a good one! Next up, though, you’ll need to vote for the second Wave 4 ship. We’ve removed the winner and the lowest-performing ship, the salvage tug, from the options… it’s up to you to decide which ship we announce next. I look forward to seeing which you pick.

Until then, thank you for your continued support! Your belief in the world we’re building together is what makes everything possible. I can’t wait to show you what we have up our sleeves for Friday, so be sure to check back then. And tell your friends: the Best Damn Space Sim Ever is coming!
Only a few days ago, I wrote the $54 million letter which is truly incredible. I think everyone should take a moment to appreciate the enormity of what you as a community have achieved. Two years ago, the idea that a group of people who love space sims, PC gaming and the promise of a huge new universe to adventure around in could unite to raise $55 million to fund a game was unthinkable. Every one of you, from single Aurora pilots to those building their own fleets, has been part of something unprecedented. Today, we’re in the Guinness Book of World Records, and not as the largest crowdfunded game of all time, but as the largest crowdfunded anything of all time!

Reclaimer Concept Art showing the claw in use.
Reclaimer Concept Art showing the claw in use.
I’m very glad to see that the Reclaimer is so popular! This is a ship that you made possible, and I think it speaks to exactly what’s cool about Star Citizen: we’re going beyond the traditional dogfighting game and building a living universe. The fact that so many players want to take part in salvage ops makes me more hopeful than ever! How many have we sold? Well, in the Reclaimer’s description, we mention that it can store roughly a single Constellation worth of scrap. In the current stats (always subject to change!) a Bengal carrier weighs in at about 1,400 times a Constellation… meaning that it would take 1,400 Reclaimers to haul it away as wreckage. Well, the UEE had better watch out: we’ve released enough Reclaimers so far to dismantle THREE Bengals! I’ve included a new piece of Reclaimer concept art which has just come in; here you can see the ship’s claw salvage mechanism in action!

Concept Art
Concept Art
I sometimes get asked why continue to raise money. Haven’t you already raised enough to make the game? The answer is that Star Citizen isn’t a normal game. It’s not being developed like a normal game and it’s not being funded like a normal game. I’ve had to toss aside a lot of my knowledge from the old way of developing and embrace a completely new world. There is no publisher. There is no venture capitalist wanting a massive return in three years. There is no need to cram the game onto a disc and hope we got it all right. Star Citizen is not the type of game that will be played for a few weeks, then put on a shelf to gather dust. Instead of building a game in secrecy we can be fully open with you as a community who have made this game possible. We can involve the future player base in the creative feedback loop as we develop and iterate core systems. As a group we are all involved and united in our quest to make the best game possible.

I have a lot of industry friends pat me on the back and say, “Wow, it must be so great to be operating in profit even before you ship!” Their look usually turns to incredulity when I explain that my intention is for all the money we bring in before launch to be spent on development. It is the community, from the existing backers who continue to support the game, to new members who join every day who are setting the level of ambition and budget for Star Citizen. Every effort is about enriching the game’s vision. Funding to date has allowed us to go so far beyond what I thought was possible in 2012. You’re still getting that game, no question, but it will be all the richer and so much more immersive because of the additional funding.

Long ago I stopped looking at this game the way I did when I worked for a publisher who gave me a fixed budget to make a retail game. I now look at our monthly fundraising and use that to set the amount of resources being used to develop this game. We keep a healthy cash reserve so that if funding stopped tomorrow we would still be able to deliver Star Citizen (not quite to the current level of ambition, but well above what was planned in Oct 2012). If you combine our in-house staff and outsourced developers, we now number more than 280 people. Your support has created a significant number of jobs in the gaming industry. (And no matter what you might have heard, only a small number of our team is tasked with designing new ships!)

If we had raised the original amount and no more, we wouldn’t be able to deliver involved capital ship systems or the level of FPS gameplay that we are now planning for planets in the Persistent Universe. Nor would have the time or budget to continually upgrade the game with new features like Physically Based Rendering (PBR), or continually strive to make the art assets better. Just compare the Hornet from October 2012 to the current PBR Hornet in Arena Commander. Our ability to iterate in Arena Commander, to try different flight or targeting schemes, or add new game modes that are test beds for future Persistent Universe gameplay is all due to our increased funding, as is the ability to deliver FPS, Planetside and Squadron 42 as modules or episodic content for the community all before the game is “done.” And in the process, you’re giving us the time to get it right, and you’re giving us more opportunities to share our work with you.

I know some people are afraid of “feature creep” and the game never being finished as we keep adding functionality and content to the mix with increased funding. I would say that this would be fair criticism if we were delivering this game at retail and on disc. However, we are online and already pushing out builds, well before Star Citizen reaches what anyone would consider a “finished” stage. Just because we haven’t implemented a planned feature or built a certain asset yet doesn’t prevent us from sharing the game with everyone right now. It’s this evolved process which gives us the Hangar and Arena Commander and so many modules yet to come. We’re sharing the game as it’s being built and it’s an amazing opportunity for everyone who has backed, to have input on the direction the game is going. You just don’t get this in the traditional game business.

Ship sales and new members of our community are the two main fund raising sources. I want to stress that no one has to or should contribute more than the basic amount for a starting package. Everything is earnable in the game with enough time (and skill). However, if you like the direction we are taking and want to contribute more to the development of Star Citizen, then purchasing different ships with diverse roles are a great way to give back for this support. The new ships add interesting new gameplay and populating the future Persistent Universe with a range of different ships, flown by players pursuing all kinds of professions, will only add to the richness of the game once it’s fully live.

That’s what Star Citizen is about: the creative freedom to build something unlike anything that has been done before and the ability to do it with the support of a community that is as passionate about this game as I am. We want to make the Best Damn Space Sim Ever, and with your continued support I know we will.

Now, on to the stretch goals! This time around, you unlocked a user-voted ship upgrade!

Ballistic Gatling – Preacher Armament Inquisition XXII: Preacher’s Inquisition XXII is the weapon to turn to when you want complete target saturation. Its dual-ammo feed allows you to hotswap feeds without exiting your ship, giving every owner the ultimate flexibility to pick the ammo based on the situation. This Arena Commander upgrade will be given to all players who pledged before we reached the 55M goal.
We’ll be placing two of these guns on every account that backed before $54 million, and they’ll be available in a future Arena Commander patch! (These guns will be among the first to come off our new component pipeline.)

For our next series of stretch goals, we’re going to ask you to pick ‘wave four’ of Star Citizen’s ships! Now that the previous set, also selected by backers, are exiting the concept process, our artists can start on another group. We’ve selected ten ship concepts we think are interesting and which would improve the Star Citizen universe. Some are combat-oriented, others speak to the larger Star Citizen universe… and the next one we build is in your hands! With each upcoming letter, we’ll select one winner and eliminate the least popular, until five have been chosen. Please vote for your favorite in the poll below.

I’m excited to see what you choose; I know my favorite already. Your input helps create Star Citizen just like your pledges. We couldn’t do this without you; thank you for making the Best Damn Space Sim Ever happen.
We have passed $54 million in crowd funding, and we have two groups to thank: racers who picked up M50s and 350Rs during our sale… and new backers who are just discovering Star Citizen! I’m proud to announce that since the $53 million letter we have added almost 10,000 new Citizens to our ranks. Thank you for making this possible, and especially affirming my belief that the best way to sell the dream of Star Citizen is to let our backers spread the word. Every new backer makes the game better… so tell your friends!

Before we talk about stretch goals, I’d like to share some work from Foundry 42. You may have seen a few seconds of this video on a recent Around the Verse, but here it is in its full glory: the Retaliator greyboxing status update! The Retaliator is a heavy, multi-crew bomber that’s going to play like nothing you’ve seen in a space sim before… please enjoy seeing how much detail the team in Manchester is putting into the ship.

At the $54 million level, you’ve unlocked additional AI activities for the persistent world!

More Detailed AI Activities – we’ll add ten distinct types of AI character roles on planetside environments! At $54 million, this includes Bartender, Doctor, Entertainer, Nurse, Sanitation Worker, Security Guard, Shopper, Tourist, Vagrant and Vandal. Future AI roles will be added with future stretch goals! Each additional ‘class’ of character will be fully expressive and have a role to play in Star Citizen’s planetside interaction AND the game’s greater economy.
One of the great things Tony Zurovec has brought to the process is a desire to enhance the planetside portion of Star Citizen well beyond my original goals. He wants to see a living, breathing world on our planetside landouts, complete with AI and player roles that you don’t ordinarily associate with a space combat game. So adding things like security guards, shoppers, tourists and vagrants, each with their own form and function, to the game is another step to making it more of a real world!

The winner of last week’s “ship upgrade” reward poll was…

Ballistic Gatling – Preacher Armament Inquisition XXII: Preacher’s Inquisition XXII is the weapon to turn to when you want complete target saturation. Its dual-ammo feed allows you to hotswap feeds without exiting your ship, giving every owner the ultimate flexibility to pick the ammo based on the situation.
Every backer who pledges before we hit $55 million will have a pair of Inquisition XXII ballistic Gatling cannons added to their accounts! Since the poll was such a success, we’re going to continue it for the next stretch goal. We’ve removed the lowest performing option… and then we’ve added three more! Each of these new upgrades corresponds to a specific Arena-ready hull type… so you can choose based on the component or the ship! Which would you like as your $56 million gift?

Engine – Dragon Stellar STC Silver (300 Series): The STC Silver from Dragon Stellar Transit Company is a TR4 engine noted for its high thrust output and low EM emissions. It has been rumored that Dragon Stellar has been using inferior components, but for some pilots the decreased power and fuel efficiency is worth the extra boost, especially at this price point.
Power Plant – Broad & Rabiee Quietech M120 (Hornet): The largest class in the M series, Quietech M120 from Broad & Rabiee is a dynamic Superfluid Quantum Vortex power plant system that is capable of handling all your ship’s energy needs with a minimum of emissions. Ideally constructed for anyone who’s looking not looking to make an impression while travelling through a system.
Jump Drive – Tarsus Leaper Jump Engine (Aurora): The first step to the universe beyond. The Leaper Jump Engine from Tarsus connects with your onboard NavDrive to allow your ship to access jump points. The Leaper also includes an introductory scanning software package to try your hand at discovering the undiscovered.
For full descriptions of all the other options, please check out my previous letter.

As I have said before and I will no doubt say again, thank you all. Star Citizen has been the best experience of my career… and it’s because of the incredible community that has come together to support this game. Seeing us hit $54 million is incredible… and so is seeing you come together to support the Lego Hornet, or seeing Citizens host events and becoming friends because of this game. I am so thoroughly happy that you are coming together in so many ways to make the world I’m building your own.
